INVESTIGATING THE RECOGNITION
AND INTERACTIONS OF NON-POLAR
α HELICES IN BIOLOGY

A thesis submitted to the University of Manchester
for the degree of Doctor of Philosophy
in the Faculty of Chemistry

2017

James Alexander Baker
orcid.org/0000-0003-0874-2298

Contents
Abstract

5

Abstract

6

Lay Abstract

7

Declaration

8

Copyright Statement

9

Acknowledgements

10

The Author

11

1 Introduction

12

1.1

1.2

1.3

1.4

α Helices; Structure And Function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

12

1.1.1

Trans-membrane Helix Sequence Composition . . . . . . . . . .

12

1.1.2

Hydrophobicity of Trans-membrane Segments . . . . . . . . . .

15

1.1.3

Sequence Complexity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

17

α Helices In Membranes . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

18

1.2.1

The Transmembrane Protein Problem . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

18

1.2.2

The Importance Of Transmembrane Proteins . . . . . . . . . . .

20

Biological Membrane Composition . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

20

1.3.1

Lipids of the Membrane . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

20

1.3.2

Membrane Potential . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

21

Biogenesis of Trans-membrane Proteins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

23

1.4.1

23

Translocation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .
2

1.4.2
1.5

Translocon Independent Membrane Insertion . . . . . . . . . . .

23

Aims of This Thesis. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

24

2 The “Negative-Outside” Rule

25

2.1

Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

25

2.2

Summary . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

25

2.3

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

26

2.4

Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

31

2.4.1

Acidic residues within and nearby Trans-membrane Helix (TMH)
segments are rare . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.4.2

Amino acid residue distribution analysis reveals a “negative-notinside/negative-outside” signal in single-pass TMH segments . .

2.4.3

31

33

Amino acid residue distribution analysis reveals a general negative charge bias signal in outside flank of multi-pass TMH segments — the negative outside enrichment rule . . . . . . . . . .

2.4.4

35

Further significant sequence differences between single-pass and
multi-pass helices: distribution of tryptophan, tyrosine, proline
and cysteine . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.4.5

Hydrophobicity and leucine distribution in TMHs in single- and
multi-pass proteins . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.4.6

39

A negative-outside (or negative-non-inside) signal is present across
many membrane types . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

2.4.7

38

41

Amino acid compositional skews in relation to TMH complexity
and anchorage function . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

42

2.5

Discussion . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

45

2.6

Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

53

2.6.1

Datasets . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

53

2.6.2

On the determination of flanking regions for TMHs and the
TMH alignment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

57

2.6.3

Separating simple and complex single-pass helices. . . . . . . . .

59

2.6.4

Distribution normalisation . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

59

2.6.5

Hydrophobicity calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

60

3

2.6.6

Normalised net charge calculations . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

60

2.6.7

statistics . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

61

3 Tail-Anchored Proteins Revisited; An Up-To-Date Dataset And Biochemical Insights Into Spontaneous Insertion

62

3.1

Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

62

3.2

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

62

3.3

Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

62

3.3.1

Filtering the Uniprot database . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

63

3.3.2

Calculating Hydrophobicity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

63

3.3.3

Calculating Sequence Complexity . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

63

Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

63

3.4.1

An Up To Date Tail-Anchor Dataset . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

63

3.4.2

Potential Tail-Anchored SNARE Protein Discovery . . . . . . .

63

3.4.3

Biology of Spontaneously Inserting Tail Anchored Proteins . . .

63

3.4

4 Protein Classification Based on Intra-membrane Complexity Arrangement

64

4.1

Abstract . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

64

4.2

Introduction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

64

4.3

Methods . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

64

4.4

Results . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

64

5 Conclusions
5.1

65

Outlook . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .

65

5.1.1

65

The hydrophobicity–sequence complexity continuum . . . . . . .

Word count 22,000
4

The University of Manchester
James Alexander Baker
Doctor of Philosophy
Investigating the Recognition and Interactions of Non-Polar α Helices in
Biology
July 13, 2017

5

Abstract
Non–polar helices figure prominently in structural biology, from the first protein structure (myoglobin) through trans-membrane segments, to current work on recognition
of protein trafficking and quality control. Trans-membrane α helix containing proteins
makep around a quarter of all proteins, as well as two-thirds of drug targets, and
contain some of the most critical proteins required for life as we know it. Yet they
are fundamentally difficult to study experimentally. This is in part due to the very
features that make them so biologically influential: their non–polar trans-membrane
helix regions. What is missing in the current literature is a nuanced understanding
of the complexities of the helix composition beyond a hydrophobic region of around
20 residues. Currently, it is known that the properties of trans-membrane protein α
helices underpin membrane protein insertion mechanisms.
By leveraging large datasets of trans-membrane proteins, this thesis is focused on
characterising features of α helices en masse, particularly regarding their topology,
membrane–protein interactions, and intramembrane protein interactions.
In this thesis, I make the argument that there are different classifications of transmembrane α helices. These have markedly different evolutionary pressures, these
different classes interact differently with the membrane, and each class serve the protein
differently.

6

Lay Abstract
The survival of each of our cells relies on a a cellular barrier to separate themselves
from the surrounding environment – this cellular skin can be thought of as the bag that
contains all the important machinery required for normal cell function. The barrier
works by being chemically very different to both the outside environment, and to the
inside of the cell, which in both cases are mostly water. The membrane is fatty, and
repels water.
Proteins are the molecular machinery that power the cells. Around a third of our
genome codes for protein that are permanently embedded in the membrane.
In this thesis, we focus particularly on the parts of the protein that are embedded
in the water repelling cellular skin. Traditionally, these regions are hard to study,
because we must first remove them from the cellular wall, which causes problems since
the embedded regions also repel water and this often causes them to stick to one
another, making them hard to work with in a laboratory setting.
In this thesis we analyse thousands of proteins to further our understanding of
electrical charges in the embedded regions and find that negative charge on the outside
of the cell has been evolutionarily selected across bacteria, animals, and plants. This
is especially true for regions that specifically anchor the protein into the cellular wall.
Where the embedded regions have additional function, for example ferrying something
in or out of the cell, the negative charge “bias” can no longer be seen.

7

Declaration
No portion of the work referred to in the thesis has been
submitted in support of an application for another degree
or qualification of this or any other university or other
institute of learning.

8

Copyright Statement
i. The author of this thesis (including any appendices and/or schedules to this thesis)
owns certain copyright or related rights in it (the “Copyright”) and s/he has given
The University of Manchester certain rights to use such Copyright, including for
administrative purposes.
ii. Copies of this thesis, either in full or in extracts and whether in hard or electronic
copy, may be made only in accordance with the Copyright, Designs and Patents
Act 1988 (as amended) and regulations issued under it or, where appropriate, in
accordance with licensing agreements which the University has from time to time.
This page must form part of any such copies made.
iii. The ownership of certain Copyright, patents, designs, trade marks and other intellectual property (the “Intellectual Property”) and any reproductions of copyright
works in the thesis, for example graphs and tables (“Reproductions”), which may
be described in this thesis, may not be owned by the author and may be owned by
third parties. Such Intellectual Property and Reproductions cannot and must not
be made available for use without the prior written permission of the owner(s) of
the relevant Intellectual Property and/or Reproductions.
iv. Further information on the conditions under which disclosure, publication and commercialisation of this thesis, the Copyright and any Intellectual Property and/or
Reproductions described in it may take place is available in the University IP Policy
(see http://documents.manchester.ac.uk/DocuInfo.aspx?DocID=487), in any relevant Thesis restriction declarations deposited in the University Library, The University Library’s regulations (see http://www.manchester.ac.uk/library/aboutus/regulations) and in The University’s Policy on Presentation of Theses.

9

Acknowledgements
I would like to thank all members of both the Eisenhaber research group, as well as the
Curtis and Warwicker research group for discussion, but in particular Jim Warwicker,
Frank Eisenhaber, Birgit Eisenhaber, and Wing-Cheong Wong for supervision and
guidance during my research. I would also like to thank The University of Manchester
and the A*STAR Singapore Bioinformatics Institute for funding the project. Furthermore, I would like to extend my gratitude to the research group of Professor Stephen
High.

10

The Author
The author has previously completed a Masters in Biochemistry from the University
of Liverpool, graduating in 2014.
In between the penultimate and final year of Masters study, the author undertook
an internship at Chulalongkorn University under the supervision of Dr. Thanyada
Rungrotmongkol. The internship contributed to simulating several compounds that
could target a viral protease (3C pro ) of both Cocksackie 16 and Enterovirus 72, of
which infect X and kill Y people per year. The results showed that several compounds
were more potent inhibitors at a protein level than the currently championed drug
candidates.
In the final year of the Masters degree, under the supervision of Dr. Dan Rigden, the author modelled domains of a transmembrane protein involved in bacterial
competence (ComEC) in Bacillus subtilis. Structural and sequential analysis of the
models revealed a cryptic OB fold in a domain of unknown function, and a potential
competence nuclease function in the β –lactamase–like domain.
During the first year of this PhD studentship, the author presented a part of
the work in Berlin at the FEBS annual congress (Baker, J. A. and Warwicker, J. A
Bioinformatic Method to Identify Potential SNARE Proteins.
Late Breaker (2015))

11

40th FEBS Congress

Chapter 1
Introduction
Trans-membrane (TM) biology is a huge and varied field that is ultimately the study
of the interface between compartments of the cell; one of the fundamental pillars
of life as we know it [Ladokhin2015]. Trans-membrane Protein (TMP)s include
some of the most critical to life proteins as well as a large number of drug targets.
However, the experimental inaccessibility of the TMH has hampered the progress of
study compared to their globular structural analogues. Despite progress over the last
decade, the understanding of the relationship between the sequence and function of a
TMH is incomplete.
In this chapter we will place the TMH problem in context, then describe the important biological aspects of the TMH (the traversing Trans-membrane Segment (TMS)
as well as the membrane itself), and discuss tools and methods that allow us to analyse
and describe the nuanced differences between these TMH sequences.

1.1
1.1.1

α Helices; Structure And Function
Trans-membrane Helix Sequence Composition

Measurements of the TMH regions have found that they are roughly 20 residues in
length; 17.3±3.1 from 160 TMHs [Hildebrand2004], 27.1±5.4 residues based on
129 TMHs [Ulmschneider2001], 26.4 residues based on 45 TMHs [Bowie1997],

25.3±6.0 residues based on 702 TMHs [Cuthbertson2005], 24.6±5.6 from 837 TMHs [Baeza-Delgado2013
and 28.6±1.6Å to 33.5 ±3.1Å from 191 proteins depending on membrane types [Pogozheva2013].
12

1.1. α HELICES; STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION

13

There are a couple of reasons for this variation. Primarily is that the boundaries of
TMHs are extremely hard to precisely identify since it is unclear exactly how far the
TMH rises into the water interface region [VonHeijne2006]. Secondly is that it is
emerging that different membranes have different thicknesses [VanMeer2008], and
that this is directly reflected in the hydrophobic lengths of the TMH [Sharpe2010,
Pogozheva2013].

Outer leaflet
Inner leaflet

Membrane

Outside
(non-cytosolic)

Hydrophobic
groups

Polar
groups
Positive
charge
Inside
(cytosolic)

Figure 1.1: A cartoon showing the general components of the membrane and a typical TMH. The example used here for illustrative purposes is the trans-membrane
region of therein (PDB 2LK9) [Skasko2012]. Dark grey areas denote the area of
lipid head groups. The residues found in these areas are often described as flanking
regions and are often in contact with the aqueous interface of the membrane. The
helix core is mostly composed of hydrophobic residues. Although the regions labelled
here generally hold true in terms of the statistical distribution of polar, non-polar,
and charged groups, it is by no means absolute laws and many proteins break these
“rules” [Sharpe2010, Baeza-Delgado2013, Pogozheva2013].
The language used to describe TMHs varies somewhat across the literature, primarily due to a changing understanding of TMH general structure and relevance to
function over the last 15 years or so. There is a general composition of a TMH despite
specific protein and membrane constraints [Sharpe2010].

14

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
A study by Baeza–Delgado et al. from 2013 [Baeza-Delgado2013] looked at

TMHs in 170 integral membrane proteins from a manually maintained database of experimentally confirmed TMPs; MPTopo [Jayasinghe2001]. The group examined the
distribution of residues along the TMHs. As expected, half of the natural amino acids
are equally distributed along ransmembrane (TM) helices whereas aromatic, polar,
and charged amino acids along with proline are biasedly near the flanks of the TM helices [Baeza-Delgado2013]. It has been noted that transitions between the polar and
non-polar groups at the ends of the hydrophobic core occur in a more defined edge on
the cytoplasmic side than at the extracytoplasmic face when counting from the middle
of the helix outwards [Baeza-Delgado2013]. This is probably reflecting the different
lipid composition of both leaflets of biological membranes [Baeza-Delgado2013].
A previous study by Sharpe et al. from 2010 used 1192 human and 1119 yeast
predicted TMHs that were not structurally validated to further explore the difference
in TMH and leaflet structure by exploiting the evolutionarily conserved sequence differences between the TMH in the inner and outer leaflets [Sharpe2010]. TMHs from
vertebrates and invertebrates were found to be reasonably similar compositionally. The
differences in consensus TMH structure implies that there are general differences between the membranes of the Golgi and Endoplasmic Reticulum (ER). The abundance
of serines in the region following the lumenal end of Golgi TMSs probably reflects
the fact that this part of many Golgi enzymes forms a flexible linker that tethers the
catalytic domain to the membrane [Sharpe2010].

The “Positive-Inside” Rule
Two publications by von Heijne coined the “Positive-Inside” rule demonstrated the
practical value of positively charged residue sequence clustering in topology prediction
of TMHs in bacteria [VonHeijne1989, VonHeijne1992]. It was clearly defined and
shown that positively charged residues more commonly were found on the “inside” of
the cytoplasm rather than the periplasm of E. coli. More recently still large-scale
sequence analysis of TMHs from different organelle membrane surfaces in eukaryotic proteomes, show the clustering of positive charge being cytosolic [Sharpe2010,
Baeza-Delgado2013, Pogozheva2013].

1.1. α HELICES; STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION

15

The Aromatic Belt
Tyrosine and tryptophan residues commonly are found at the interface boundaries of
the TMH and this feature is called the “aromatic belt” [Hessa2005, Granseth2005,
Sharpe2010, Baeza-Delgado2013, Nilsson2005]. Not all aromatic residues are
not found in the aromatic belt; phenylalanine has no particular preference for this
region [Granseth2005, Braun1999]. However, it still remains unclear if this is to
do with anchorage or translocon recognition [Baeza-Delgado2013].

Snorkeling
Broadly speaking, TMHs are non-polar. However, some contain polar and charged
residues in the helix itself. Whilst this might seem thermodynamically unstable at first
glance, a molecular dynamic feature called the “snorkel” effect explains in part how
this is possible [Chamberlain2004, Strandberg2003]. Simply put, the snorkelling
effect involves the long flexible side chain of leucine reaching the water interface region
to interact with the polar headgroups of the bilayer even when the α helix backbone is
pulled into the hydrophobic layer [Krishnakumar2007]. This has also been suggested
to allow helices to adapt to varying thicknesses of the membrane [Kandasamy2006].
More recently it was found that although in simulations the energetic cost of arginine
at the centre of the TMH is large, in vivo experimentation with the Sec61 translocon
reveals a much smaller penalty [Ulmschneider2017]. That same study also found
that in simulations, snorkeling, bilayer deformation, and peptide tilting combined to
to be sufficient to lower the thermodynamic stability penalty of arginine insertion
so that hydrophoic TMHs with a central arginine residue will readily insert into the
membrane.

1.1.2

Hydrophobicity of Trans-membrane Segments

Perhaps the most prevalent and important feature of the trans-membrane regions is
the membrane spanning region which is composed mostly of non-polar residues. More
recently the hydrophobic group region has been associated with cell localisation and
a broad range of biochemical functions [Junne2010, Wong2012].

16

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION
Over the last 50 years or so, there have been many attempts to use hydropho-

bicity scales of residues to predict structural classifications of proteins. Due to the
vast amounts of scales, major efforts have been made to compare them to identify
which ones are better for which tasks of identifying structural elements [Simm2016,
Peters2014]. Simm et al. 2016 [Simm2016] compared 98 scales and found that the
accuracy of a scale for secondary structure prediction depends on the spacing of the
hydrophobicity values of certain amino acids but generally that the methods behind
the scales don’t affect the separation capacity between β sheets or α helices.
Throughout this thesis, several scales are used to evaluate and estimate hydrophobic values of peptide chains. All the scales aim for quantifying the hydrophobic values
of each residue. There are several key differences in their methodology, assumptions,
and aims. Ultimately, all the scales are attempting to allow estimation of ∆Gwhf ;
the free energy of a folded helix (f ) from the water (w) into the membrane core (h).
This free energy measurement is regarded as being currently experimentally inaccessible [Cymer2014].
Although as a trend most of the scales agree, because of the methodological differences, there are indeed variations of values even after normalisation. Due to these
discrepancies, it is preferable and typical amongst the literature to use several scales
to verify the observable trends resulting from interpretation from an individual scale.
Notably, one of the classic scales, Kyte & Doolittle Hydropathy Scale shows a striking
similarity to the modern Hessa’s ∆Gaa
app scale, and that generally the “better” scales
count proline as hydrophilic, and focus on helix recognition rather than amino acid
analogues [Peters2014]. In α helices from soluble proteins, proline is almost always
a helix breaker, and α helix prediction scales don’t even attempt to quantify a proline
scoring penalty. Several of the scales used throughout this thesis are outlined below.

Kyte & Doolittle Hydropathy Scale

A scale based on the water–vapour transfer free energy and the interior-exterior distribution of individual amino acids [Kyte1982].

1.1. α HELICES; STRUCTURE AND FUNCTION

17

Hessa’s Biological Hydrophobicity Scale
This is arguably the most biologically relevant scale [Peters2014], and is often called
the ∆Gaa
app scale. The scale is based on an experimental method where the free energy
exchange during recognition of designed polypeptide TMH by the ER Sec61 translocon
occurred [Hessa2005]. These measurements were then used to calculate a biological
hydrophobicity scale. The original study reported positional variance in some residues
and is strictly valid only for residues in the core of the TMH. A more refined study
quantified the positional dependencies of each amino acid type [Hessa2007].

White and Wimley Octanol – Interface Whole Residue Scale
This scale is calculated from two other scales; the octanol scale, and the interface
scale [White1999]. This scale is fundamentally based on the partitioning of hostguest pentapeptides (acetyl-WL-X-LL-OH) and another set of peptides (AcWLm)
between water and octanol, as well as water to Palmitoyloleoylphosphatidylcholine
(POPC).

The Eisenberg Hydrophobic Moment Consensus Scale
The Eisenberg scale is a consensus scale based on the earlier scales from Tanford [Nozaki1971],
Wolfenden [Rose1993], Chothia [Chothia1976], Janin [Janin1979], and the von

Heijne scale [VonHeijne1979]. The scales are normalised according to serine [Eisenberg1984]
The automatic TRANSMEM annotation currently used in Uniprot is according to
TMHMM [Krogh2001], Memsat [Jones2007], Phobius [Kall2004] and the hydrophobic moment plot method of Eisenberg and coworkers [Eisenberg1984].

1.1.3

Sequence Complexity

Sequence properties that can be analysed by bioinformatics, the sequence complexity
and hydrophobicity, of the TMH have been used to predict the role of the TMH as
either functional or structural, and as a discrete cluster from other SCOP annotated
helices [Wong2012]. Those findings demonstrated that the sequence of the TMH
holds valuable information regarding biological roles, and forms the basis of our interest
in the link between the polarity of a helix and functional activity beyond structural

18

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION

anchorage.
Sequence complexity otherwise referred to as sequence entropy, is essentially an
estimate of the linguistic entropy of a string. In the context of biology can be thought
of as an estimation of the non-randomness of a sequence. Sequence complexity can
be used to analyse DNA sequences [Pinho2013, Oliver1993, Troyanskaya2002],
however here we will focus on the analysis of the complexity of a sequence in protein
sequences.
The compositional complexity is measured over sequence windows. If we have an
amino acid composition {ni }i = min i, . . . , max i with a window length of L = Σni ,
the total number of sequences can be calculated by dividing a factorial of the length
by the product of the compositions, i.e N = L!/Πni possible sequences. The SEG
algorithm [WOOTTON1994269, Wootton1996] identifies subsegments of the raw
region which have the lowest probability. The algorithm searches for and concatenates
sub-threshold segments for the Shannon entropy-like term in equation 1.1

K2 = −Σ

ni
ni
log
L
L

(1.1)

The lowest probability subsegment can be defined as K1 = log N/L. By altering
the window lengths, and the thresholds SEG can be optimised to search for subtle
compositional deviations, such as coil-coiled regions.

1.2
1.2.1

α Helices In Membranes
The Transmembrane Protein Problem

Because of the experimental hindrance, TMP biology has been relatively slow to
emerge. Throughout the 1990s the concept of a TMH was simple and fairly assured:
they were greasy peptides of around 30Å in length, often bundled together and oriented perpendicularly to the membrane. By 2006, crystallography had elucidated more
than 60 high-resolution structures. Although the classic TMH structures were broadly
prevalent, these structures contained a plethora of unusual TMHs. TMSs are capable
of partial spanning of the membrane, spanning using oblique angles, and even lying flat
on the membrane surface [VonHeijne2006, Elofsson2007]; the classical model was

1.2. α HELICES IN MEMBRANES

19

incomplete. Even recently, there is a contingency in the membrane biology field that
despite progress over the last decade there is still a lack of information regarding the
relationship between TMH sequences and function, TMH structure, intra-membrane
TMP assembly, and the behavior of TMHs in the lipid bilayer; the native biological
environment of TMHs [Ladokhin2015].
Furthermore, the insertion and formation of the unusually orientated TMHs and of
the more traditional TMHs have been shown to be underpinned by complex thermodynamic equilibriums and electrostatic interactions [Cymer2014, Elisa2012, Ismail2015].
As well as being a biophysically convoluted system, TMHs are biologically functional
beyond anchorage in many cases. TMSs have been identified as regulators of protein
quality control and trafficking mechanisms, shifting the idea away from TMHs broadly
exclusively functioning as anchors [Hessa2011], and crucially this function beyond
anchorage can be revealed by sensitive, careful analysis of the sequence information
alone [Wong2012].
When predicting the function of any protein, one follows the dicta that function
is facilitated by form, and form is determined by the sequence; the more similar the
sequences, the more likely that the function is similar. For globular soluble proteins having the same folds induces strict biochemical restrictions on the packing of
a hydrophobic protein core which requires similarity of non-polar residue patterns.
Sequence analysis of non-globular TMPs has not been studied to nearly the same extent yet homology paradigms are silently extended and applied to them. In the case
of Signal Peptide (SP)s or TMSs the physical constraints are similar for all TMPs,
and so matching is indeed merely a reflection of the physical environment of the bilayer, not the common ancestry. Worryingly, because of this oversight, it appears
that between 2.1% and 13.6% of Pfam hits for SPs or TMSs are indeed false positive
results [Wong2010].
Over the last decade, Nanodiscs have been routinely used to much more easily
obtain crystal structures. Nanodiscs overcome some of the major challenges caused by
the hydrophobic helices and a more faithful representation of the biological membranes
than alternative model membranes like liposomes [Borch2009].
However, critical questions remain: How is the TMH oriented in the membrane,
how is the TMH interacting with the membrane, how is the TMH interacting with

20

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION

another TMH in the membrane, does the TMH have functions beyond anchorage and
if so what are they?

1.2.2

The Importance Of Transmembrane Proteins

Membrane bound proteins underpin almost every biological process directly, or indirectly, from photosynthesis to respiration. Integral TMP are encoded by around 30% of
the genes in the human genome which reflects their biological importance [Almen2009].
These proteins allow biochemical pathways that traverse the various biological membranes used in life.
The relationship between the membrane and TMPs is underpinned by complex
thermodynamic and electrostatic equilibria. Once inserted the protein doesn’t leave
the membrane as a result of the TMH being very hydrophobic. This hydrophobicity
and the hydrophobicity of the lipid tails means that they self-associate and this association is entropically driven by water. Another way of describing it is that they
fiercely dissociate from the water. The overall ∆G for a TMH in the membrane is
-12kcalmol−1 [Cymer2014]; the association of the helix in the membrane is typically
spontaneous.

1.3
1.3.1

Biological Membrane Composition
Lipids of the Membrane

The compartmentalization of cellular biochemistry is arguably one of the most significant events to have occurred in evolution and is certainly one of the fundamental
prerequisites for life [Koshland2002]. The proteins that allow life to use this biochemical barrier are perhaps equally important. Together, the lipid bilayer and proteins
therein allow complex biochemical systems that facilitate life as we know it.
It is critical to understand that the lipid bilayer and the trans-membrane α helices are inextricably linked, and often what we observe from the α helices reflect
the properties of the much harder to study membranes. The lipid membranes influence the local structure, dynamics, and activity of proteins in the membrane in nontrivial ways [Bondar2010, Bondar2009, Jardon-Valadez2010, Kalvodova2005,

1.3. BIOLOGICAL MEMBRANE COMPOSITION

21

Urban2005, White2001, Jensen2004, Henin2014], as well as protein folding [Kauko2010].
There is a rich variety of lipid molecules that make up the biological membranes.
The majority of lipids in higher organism membranes are phospholipids, sphingolipids,
and sterols. These are composed of a glycerol molecule. Bonded to the glycerol
molecule are two hydrophobic fatty acid tail groups and a negatively-charged polar
phosphate group. The polar phosphate group is modified with an alcohol group. Water
entropically drives the self-association of the lipid molecules. In other words, the
bilayer forms from these phospholipid molecules due to the fierce dissociation between
the polar water and the hydrophobic tails. Furthermore, the bilayer maximises van der
Waals interactions between the closely-packed hydrocarbon chains, which contributes
to the stability of the bilayer. This can be seen even in relatively early Molecular
Dynamics (MD) simulations [Goetz1998].
Differenes in Membrane Compositions
It has been known for some time that the outer membranes of Gram-negative bacteria are asymmetric in terms of lipid composition. The outer membranes contain
lipopolysaccharide, whilst the inner is a mixture of approximately 25 phospholipid
types. Adding to the membrane asymmetry composition story, a thorough analysis of
residue composition in yeast and human TMH regions revealed intra-membrane leaflet
composition asymmetry in the ER, but not the Golgi [Sharpe2010]. Furthermore,
proteinlipid interactions have been shown to be determinants of membrane curvature [Jensen2004], and undertake complex orientations and conformations to allow
for hydrophobic mismatch [Planque2003].

1.3.2

Membrane Potential

Simply put, membrane potential is the voltage across a membrane. If the membrane
is permeable to a certain type of ion, then the ion will experience an electrical pulling
force during the diffusion process that pulls toward the “preferred” biological location.
This clearly depends on a chemical component involving both the charge and ion
concentration gradient.There are various ways of estimating the membrane potential
ab initio.
The Nernst equation can be derived directly from the simplified thermodynamic

22

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION

principles (i) the Boltzmann distribution, and (ii) a field charge interaction energy [Feiner1994].
It is defined as:

Em =

RT
cout
× ln
F
cin

(1.2)

Where charge Em is the membrane potential, z is the ion charge, c is the concentration of an ion in that cell environment.
One problem in a biological membranes is that the compartments always involve
multiple ion channels. The Goldman equation aims to solve this problem by accounting for several ions that contribute to cout and cin (such as K + , N a+ , and Cl− )
simultaneously:
RT
Em =
× ln
F



pK + · [K + ]out + pN a+ · [N a+ ]out + pCl− · [Cl− ]in
pK + · [K + ]in + pN a+ · [N a+ ]in + pCl− · [Cl− ]out


(1.3)

Where charge Em is the membrane potential, z is the ion charge, [i] is the ion
concentration and pi is the relative membrane permeability for the actual ion.
However, it is rife with caveats caused by the assumptions of the simplified model.
Such assumptions include ions having point charge, that the potential is constant
throughout the solution. This is compounded because it assumes the constant potential is the same as the point of measurement which can be heavily influenced by,
for example, a specific adsorption of either part of the redox pair or the competitive
adsorption of a supporting ion in solution [Feiner1994]. Therefore one should be
cautious to understand the limitations and variability when extrapolating experimentally determined E0 , particularly when using such an idealised model in a biological
context.

Organelle Membrane Potentials
Several studies have attempted to quantify the various voltages across the intracellular membranes. Negativity was found in the ER, with a voltage between between
75mV to 95mV in the ER membrane [Qin2011, Worley1994]. Negativity was found
in the mitochondrial matrix with a voltage across the mitochondrial membrane at
150mV [Perry2011]. No notable membrane potential has been identified in the
Golgi [Schapiro2000, Llopis1998].

1.4. BIOGENESIS OF TRANS-MEMBRANE PROTEINS

1.4
1.4.1

23

Biogenesis of Trans-membrane Proteins
Translocation

Tail-Anchored Proteins Post-Translationally Insert
Tail-anchored proteins are a topologically distinct class of intracellular proteins defined
by their single carboxy-terminal transmembrane domain with a cytosolic-facing aminoterminus. Tail-anchored proteins are involved in a range of key cellular functions
including protein translocation and apoptosis. Additionally, within the tail-anchored
class of proteins are a set of vesicle fusion proteins called Soluble N-EthylmaleimideSensitive Factor Attachment Receptor (SNARE) proteins. There is biomedical interest
in SNARE drug delivery mechanisms. SNAREs can fuse liposomes containing various
drug payloads into the membrane.
Notably, known SNARE TMHs are highly hydrophobic even compared to other
tail anchored TMHs.

1.4.2

Translocon Independent Membrane Insertion

Signal anchored proteins, proteins that contain a single hydrophobic segment that
serves as both a mitochondrial targeting signal and a membrane anchor, as well as
tail-anchored proteins have been shown to be able to spontaneously insert into the
membrane independently from the translocon [Elisa2012, Lan2000, Colombo2009].
It is postulated that there are electrostatic factors in the flanking regions that
contribute to this spontaneous membrane insertion. Our experimental collaborators in
Stephen Highs group are interested in a small group of tail-anchored proteins that have
very polar trans-membrane domains and are capable of liposome membrane insertion
without insertion machinery, also known as spontaneous insertion. They have found
that chimeric synaptobrevin, one of the first identified SNARE proteins, is capable
of spontaneous insertion if the tail anchor domain is replaced by the TM domains
belonging to a protein of known spontaneously inserting domains. Their studies have
moved the focus of spontaneous insertion away from the loop regions and onto the
physicochemical factors of the TMH itself. The idea that SNARE proteins are modular
and capable of spontaneous insertion has significant implications for both biomedical

24

CHAPTER 1. INTRODUCTION

application in liposome-based drug delivery and can aid future research for testing
complex biological molecular networks [Allen2013, Nordlund2014].

1.5

Aims of This Thesis.

Chapter 2
The “Negative-Outside” Rule
The description of a TMH remains incomplete. The understanding of TMP topology is erroneous, and despite a wealth of structures, the general model of helix-helix
and helix-lipid interactions remains speculative and requires a great deal of intensive
analysis to generate a working model of a particular TMP.
The work presented in this chapter is an expanded version of published work [Baker2017].
We use advanced statistical analysis to analyze large sequence datasets that have rich
topological annotation. By analyzing these sequences in the context of anchorage, we
find that some TMHs are confined to biological constraints of the membrane, whereas
others that likely contain function beyond anchorage, are less conforming to the membrane. Specifically, there is further elaboration of statistical definitions in the methods
than in the published paper.

2.1

Abstract

2.2

Summary

As the idea of positive residues inside the cytoplasm emerged during the late 1980s,
so did the idea of negative residues working in concert with TMH orientation. It
was shown that removing a single lysine residue reversed the topology of a model
erichia coli protein, whereas much higher numbers of negatively charged residues
are needed to reverse topology [Nilsson1990].

One would also expect to see a

skew in negatively charged distribution if a cooperation between oppositely charged
25

26

CHAPTER 2. THE “NEGATIVE-OUTSIDE” RULE

residues orientated a TMH, however there is no conclusive evidence in the literature for
an opposing negatively charged skew [Granseth2005, Nilsson2005, Sharpe2010,
Baeza-Delgado2013, Pogozheva2013]. However, in E. coli negative residues do
experience electrical pulling forces when traveling through the SecYEG translocon indicating that negative charges are biologically relevant [Ismail2015]. In this chapter,
we explore the literature surroudning charged residue distribution in the TMH, and
demonstrate that the “negative-outside” skew exists in anchoring TMHs

2.3

Introduction

Two decades ago, the classic concept of a TMH was a rather simple story: Typical
TMPs were thought to be anchored in the membrane by membrane-spanning bundles
of non-polar α–helices of roughly 20 residues length, with a consistent orientation of
being perpendicular to the membrane surface. Although this is broadly true, hundreds of high quality membrane structures have elucidated that membrane-embedded
helices can adopt a plethora of lengths and orientations within the membrane. They
are capable of just partial spanning of the membrane, spanning using oblique angles, and even lying flat on the membrane surface [Elofsson2007, VonHeijne2006].
The insertion and formation of the TMHs follow a complex thermodynamic equilibrium [Cymer2006]. From the biological function point of view, many TMHs have
multiple roles besides being just hydrophobic anchors; for example, certain TMHs
have been identified as regulators of protein quality control and trafficking mechanisms [Hessa2011]. As these additional biological functions are mirrored in the TMHs
sequence patterns, TMHs can be classified as simple (just hydrophobic anchors) and
complex sequence segments [Wong2010, Wong2011, Wong2012].
The relationship between sequence patterns in and in the vicinity of TMHs and
their structural and functional properties, as well as their interaction with the lipid bilayer membrane, has been a field of intensive research in the last three decades [Ladokhin2015].
Besides the span of generally hydrophobic residues in the TMH, there are other trends
in the sequence such as with a saddle-like distribution of polar residues (depressed
incidence of charged residues in the TMH itself), an enriched occurrence of positively
charged residues in the cytosolic flanking regions as well as an increased likelihood

2.3. INTRODUCTION

27

of tryptophan and tyrosine at either flank edge [Sharpe2010, VonHeijne1986,
VonHeijne1988, VonHeijne1989, Baeza-Delgado2013, Granseth2005]. Such
properties vary somewhat in length and intensity between various biological organelle
membranes, between prokaryotes and eukaryotes [Ojemalm2013] and even among eukaryotic species studied due to slightly different membrane constraints [Sharpe2010,
Pogozheva2013]. These biological dispositions are exploitable in terms of TM region
prediction in query protein sequences [Beuming2004, Zhao2006] and tools such as

the quite reliable TMHMM [Krogh2001, Sonhammer1998], Phobius [Kall2004. Kall2007]
or DAS-TMfilter represent todays prediction limit of TMHs hydrophobic cores within
the protein sequence [Cserzo2002, Cserzo2004, Kall2002]. The prediction accuracy for true positives and negatives is reported to be close to 100% and the remaining
main cause of false positive prediction are hydrophobic α–helices completely buried in
the hydrophobic core of proteins. To note, reliable prediction of TMHs and protein
topology is a strong restriction for protein function of even otherwise noncharacterised
proteins [Eisenhaber2016, Eisenhaber2012, Sherman2015] and thus, very valuable information.
The “positiveinside rule” reported by von Heijne [VonHeijne2006, VonHeijne1989]
postulates the preferential occurrence of positively charged residues (lysine and arginine) at the cytoplasmic edge of TMHs. The practical value of positively charged
residue sequence clustering in topology prediction of TMH was first shown for the
plasmalemma in bacteria [VonHeijne1989, Sipos1993]. As a trend, the “positiveinside rule” has since been confirmed with statistical observations for most membrane proteins and biological membrane types [Baeza-Delgado2013, Gavel1991,
Nilsson2005, Wallin1998]. However, more recent evidence suggests that, in thylakoid membranes, the positive-inside rule is less applicable due to the co-occurrence of

aspartic acid and glutamic acid residues together with positively charged residues [Pogozheva20
The positive-inside rule also received support from protein engineering experiments that revealed conclusive evidence for positive charges as a topological determinant [VonHeijne1989, Beltzer1991, Kida2006, Nilsson1990]. Mutational experiments demonstrated that charged residues, when inserted into the center of the
helix, had a large effect on insertion capabilities of the TMH via the translocon. Insertion becomes more unfavourable when the charge was placed closer to the TMH

28

CHAPTER 2. THE “NEGATIVE-OUTSIDE” RULE

core [Hessa2005].
It remains unclear exactly why and how exactly the positive charge determines
topology from a biophysical perspective. Positively charged residues are suggested to
be stronger determinants of topology than negatively charged residues due to a dampening of the translocation potential of negatively charged residues. This dampening
factor is the result of protein-lipid interactions with net zero charged phospholipid,
phosphatidylethanolamine and other neutral lipids. This effect favours cytoplasmic
retention of positively charged residues [Bogdanov2014].
The recent accumulation of TMP sequences and structures allowed revisiting the
problem of charged residue distribution in TMHs (see also http://blanco.biomol.uci.edu/mpstruc/).
For example, whilst β–sheets contain charged residues in the TM region, -helices generally do not (38). Large-scale sequence analysis of TMH from various organelle membrane surfaces in eukaryotic proteomes confirm the clustering of positive charge having
a statistical bias for the cytosolic side of the membrane. At the same time, there are
many TMH exception examples to the positive-inside rule; however as a trend, topology can be determined by simply looking for the most positive loop region between
helices [Sharpe2010, Baeza-Delgado2013].
When the observation of positively charged residues preferentially localised at the
cytoplasmic edge of TMHs emerged, it was also asked whether negatively charged
residues work in concert with TMH orientation. It was shown that a single additional lysine residue can reverse the topology of a model Escherichia coli protein,
whereas a much higher number of negatively charged residues is needed to achieve
the same [Nillson1990]; nevertheless, a sufficiently large negative charge can overturn the positive-inside rule [Andersson1993, Kim1994] and, thus indeed, negative
residues are topologically active to a point. Negatively charged residues were observed
in the flanks of TMHs [Baeza-Delgado2013], especially of marginally hydrophobic
TM regions [Delgado-Partin1998]. It is known that the negatively charged acidic
residues in TM regions have a non-trivial role in the biological context. In E. coli,
negative residues experience electrical pulling forces when travelling through the SecYEG translocon indicating that negative charges are biologically relevant during the
electrostatic interactions of insertion [Ismail2012, Ismail2015].

2.3. INTRODUCTION

29

Unfortunately, there is a problem with statistical evidence for preferential negative charge occurrence next to TMH regions. Early investigations indicated overall both positive and negative charge were influential topology factors, dubbed the
charge balance rule. If true, one would also expect to see a skew in the negative
charge distribution if a cooperation between oppositely charged residues orientated a
TMH [Sipos1993, Hartmann1989]. It might be expected that, if positive residues
force the loop or tail to stay inside, negative residues would be drawn outside and
topology would be determined not unlike electrophoresis. Yet, there is plenty of individual protein examples but no conclusive statistical evidence in the current literature
for a negatively charged skew [Sharpe2010, Baeza-Delgado2013, Granseth2005,
Pogozheva2013, Nilsson2005, Andersson1992].
There are many observations described in the literature that charged residues determine topology more predictably in single-pass proteins than in multi-pass TMH [Kim1994,
Harley1998]. It is thought that the charges only determine the initial orientation of
the TMH in the biological membrane; yet, the ultimate orientation must be determined
together with the totality of subsequent downstream regions [Sato1998].
With sequence-based hydrophobicity and volume analysis and consensus sequence
studies, Sharpe et al. [Sharpe2010] demonstrated that there is asymmetry in the
intramembranous space of some membranes. Crucially, this asymmetry differs among
the membrane of various organelles. They conclude that there are general differences
between the lipid composition and organisation in membranes of the Golgi and ER.
Functional aspects are also important. For example, the abundance of serines in the
region following the luminal end of Golgi TMHs appears to reflect the fact that this
part of many Golgi enzymes forms a flexible linker that tethers the catalytic domain
to the membrane [Sharpe2010].
A study by Baeza-Delgado et al. [Baeza-Delgado2013] analysed the distribution
of amino acid residue types in TMHs in 170 integral membrane proteins from a manually maintained database of experimentally confirmed TMPs (MPTopo [Jayasinghe2001])
as well as in 930 structures from the Protein Data Bank (PDB). As expected, half of
the natural amino acids are equally distributed along TMH whereas aromatic, polar
and charged amino acids along with proline are biased near the flanks of the TM helices. Unsurprisingly, leucine and other non-polar residues are far more abundant than

30

CHAPTER 2. THE “NEGATIVE-OUTSIDE” RULE

the charged residues in the TM region [Sharpe2010].
In this work, we revisit the issue of statistical evidence for the preferential distribution of negatively charged (and a few other) residues within and nearby TMHs. We
rely on the improved availability of comprehensive and large sequence and structure
datasets for TM proteins. We also show that several methodical aspects have hindered
previous studies [Sharpe2010, Baeza-Delgado2013, Pogozheva2013] to see the
consistent non-trivial skew for negatively charged residues disfavouring the cytosolic interfacial region and/or preferring the outside flank. First, we show that acidic residues
are especially rare within and in the close sequence environment of TMHs, even when
compared to positively charged lysine and arginine. Second, therefore, the manner of
normalisation is critical: Taken together with the difficulty to properly align TMHs
relative to their boundaries, column-wise frequency calculations relative to all amino
acid types as in previous studies will blur possible preferential localisations of negative
charges in the sequence. However, the outcome changes when we ask where a negative
charge occurs in the sequence relative to the total amount of negative charges in the
respective sequence region. Thus, by accounting for the rarity of acidic residues with
sensitive normalisation, the non-negative inside rule/negative-outside rule is clearly
supported by the statistical data. We find that minor changes in the flank definitions
such as taking the TMH boundaries from the database or by generating flanks by
centrally aligning TMHs and applying some standardised TMH length does not have
a noticeable influence on the charge bias detected.
Third, there are significant differences in the distribution of amino acid residues
between single-pass and multi-pass TM regions in both the intra-membrane helix and
the flanking regions with further variations introduced by taxa and by the organelles
along the secretory pathway. Importantly, we find that it is critical to weigh down the
effect of TMHs in multi-pass TMPs with no or super-short flanks to observe statistical
significance for the charge bias. To say it bluntly, if there are no flanks of sufficient
length, there is also no negative charge bias to be observed.
The charge bias effect is even clearer when a classification of TMHs into so-called
simple (which, as a trend, are mostly single-pass and mere anchors) and so-called
complex (which typically have functions beyond anchorage) is considered [Wong2010,
Wong2011, Wong2012]. We also observe parallel skews with regard to leucine,

2.4. RESULTS

31

tyrosine, tryptophan and cysteine distributions. With these large-scale datasets and
a sensitive normalisation approach, new sequence features are revealed that provide
spatial insight into TMH membrane anchoring, recognition, helix-lipid, and helix-helix
interactions.

2.4
2.4.1

Results
Acidic residues within and nearby TMH segments are
rare

In order to reliably compare the amino acid sequence properties of TMHs, we assembled datasets of TMH proteins from what are likely to be the best in terms of
quality and comprehensiveness of annotation in eukaryotic and prokaryotic representative genomes, as well as composite datasets to represent larger taxonomic groups
and with regard to subcellular locations (see Table 1). In total, 3292 single-pass
TMH segments and 29898 multi-pass TMH segments were extracted from various
UniProt [TheUniProtConsortium2014] text files according to TRANSMEM annotation (download dated 20–03–2016). The UniProt datasets used only included
manually curated records; however, it is still necessary to check for systematic bias
due to the prediction methods used by UniProt for TMH annotation in the majority
of cases without direct experimental evidence. Therefore, a fully experimentally verified dataset was also generated for comparison. The representative 1544 single-pass
and 15563 TMHs were extracted from the manually curated experimentally verified
TOPDB [Dobson2015] database (download dated 21–03–2016) referred to as ExpAll
here (Table1). TMH organelle residency is defined according to UniProt annotation.
To ensure reliability, organelles were only analysed from a representative redundancyreduced protein dataset of the most well-studied genome: Homo sapiens (referred to as
UniHuman herein). The several datasets from UniProt are subdivided into different
human organelles (UniPM, UniER, UniGolgi) and taxonomical groups (UniHuman,
UniCress, UniBacilli, UniEcoli, UniArch, UniFungi) as described in Table 1 (see also
Methods section). As will be shown below, these various datasets allow us to validate

32

CHAPTER 2. THE “NEGATIVE-OUTSIDE” RULE

our findings for a variety of conditions, namely with regard (i) to experimental verification of TMHs, (ii) to origin from various species and taxonomic groups, (iii) to
the number of TMHs in the same protein as well as (iv) to subcellular localization.
Datasets and programs used in this work can be downloaded from http://mendel.bii.astar.edu.sg/SEQUENCES/NNI/.
The hydrophobic nature of the lipid bilayer membrane implies that, generally,
charged residues should be rare within TMHs. For acidic residues, even the location
in the sequence vicinity of TMHs should be disfavoured because of the negatively
charged head groups of lipids directed towards the aqueous extracellular side or the
cytoplasm. In agreement with the biophysically justified expectations, the statistical
data confirms that acidic residues are especially rare in TMHs and their flanking
regions. In Figure 1 where we plot the total abundance of all amino acid types in
single-pass TMHs and multi-pass TMHs (including their ±5 flanking residues), acidic
residues were found to be amongst the rarest amino acids both in UniHuman and
ExpAll.
The effect is most pronounced in single-pass TMPs (Figure 1A). There are only 666
glutamates (just 1.24% of all residues) and 560 aspartates (1.05% respectively) among
the total set of 53238 residues comprised in 1705 TMHs and their flanks. Within just
the TMH regions, there are 71 glutamates (0.20% of all residues in TMHs and flanks)
and 58 aspartates (0.16% respectively). This cannot be an artefact of UniProt TMH
assignments since this feature is repeated in ExpAll. There are only 582 glutamates
(1.22%) and 520 aspartates (1.09%) among the 47568 residues involved. Within the
TMH itself, there are 64 glutamates (0.19%) and 69 aspartates (0.21%). In both
cases, the negatively charged residues represent the ultimate end of the distribution.
To note, acidic residues are rare even compared to positively charged residues which
are about 3–4 times more frequent. On a much smaller dataset of single-spanning
TMP, Nakashima et al. (51) made similar compositional studies. To compare, they
found 0.94% glutamate and 0.94% aspartate within just the TMH region (values very
similar to ours from TMHs with small flanks; apparently, they used more outwardly
defined TMH boundaries) but the content of each glutamate and aspartate within the
extracellular or cytoplasmic domains is larger by an order of magnitude, between 5.26%
and 9.34%. These latter values tend to be even higher than the average glutamate and

2.4. RESULTS

33

aspartate composition throughout the protein database (5–6% [Nakashima1992]).
In the case of multi-pass TMPs (Figures 1C and 1D), glutamates and aspartates
are still very rare in TMHs and their ±5 residue flanks (1.94% and 1.92% from the total of 377207 in the case of UniHuman respectively, 1.79% and 1.70% from the total of
454700 in the case of ExpAll). Yet, their occurrence is similar to those of histidine and
tryptophan and, notably, acidic residues are only about ∼1.5 times less frequent than
positively charged residues. The observation that acidic residues are more suppressed
in single-pass TMHs compared with the case of multi-pass TMHs is statistically significant. In Table 1, the acidic residues are counted in the helices (excluding flanking
regions) belonging to either multi-pass or single-pass helices. Indeed, single-pass helices appear to tolerate negative charge to a far lesser extent than multi-pass helices
as the data in the top two rows of Table 1 indicates (for datasets UniHuman and
ExpAll). The trend is strictly observed throughout subcellular localisations (rows 3–5
in Table 1) and taxa (rows 6–10). Statistical significance (P0.001) is found in all but
six cases. These are UniEcoli (D+E, D, E), UniArch (D+E, E) and UniFungi (E).
The problem is, most likely, that the respective datasets are quite small. Notably, the
difference between single- and multi-pass TMHs is greatest in UniPM; here, TMHs
from multi-pass proteins have on average 0.400 negative residues per helix, whereas
single-pass TMHs contained just 0.039 (P3̄.86e-28).

2.4.2

Amino acid residue distribution analysis reveals a “negativenot-inside/negative-outside” signal in single-pass TMH
segments

The rarity of negatively charged residues is a complicating issue when studying their
distribution along the sequence positions of TMHs and their flanks. For UniHuman
(Figure 2A) and ExpAll (Figure 2B), we plotted absolute abundance of aspartic acid,
glutamic acid, lysine, arginine, and leucine at each position (i.e., it scales as the equivalent fraction in the total composition of the alignment column). To note, the known
preference of positively charged residues towards the cytoplasmic side is nevertheless
evident. Yet, it becomes apparent that any bias in the occurrence of the much rarer
acidic residues is overshadowed by fluctuations in the highly abundant residues such

34

CHAPTER 2. THE “NEGATIVE-OUTSIDE” RULE

as leucine.
The trends become clearer if the occurrence of specific residues is normalised with
the total number of residues of the given amino acid type in the dataset observed in
the sequence region studied as shown for UniHuman in Figure 2C and for ExpAll in
Figure 2D. For comparison, we indicated background residue occurrences (dashed lines
calculated as averages for positions -25 to -30 and 25 to 30). The respective average
occurrences in the inside and outside flanks (calculated from an average of the values
at positions -20 to -10 and 10 to 20 respectively) are shown with wide lines.
The positive-inside rule becomes even more evident in this normalisation: Whereas
the occurrence of positively charged residues is about the background level at the
outside flank, it is about two to three times higher both for the UniHuman and the
ExpAll datasets at the inside flank. To note, the background level was found to be
1.7% (lysine) and 1.6% (arginine) in UniHuman and 1.4% (lysine and arginine) in
ExpAll. The inside flank average is 4.3% (lysine) and 4.6% (arginine) in UniHuman
and 4.2% (lysine) and 4.6% (arginine) in ExpAll. The outside flank is similar to the
background noise levels: about 1.4% (lysine) and 1.5% (arginine) in UniHuman and
about 1.5% (lysine) and 1.4% (arginine) in ExpAll.
Most interestingly, a “negativeinside depletion” trend for the negatively charged
residues is apparent from the distribution bias. The inside flank averages for glutamic
acid were 1.1% and 1.4% in UniHuman and ExpAll respectively; for aspartic acid,
1.2% and 1.4% in UniHuman and ExpAll respectively. Meanwhile, the outside flanks
for aspartic acid and glutamic acid occurrences were measured at 2.9% and 2.4% respectively in UniHuman and, in ExpAll, these values for aspartic acid and glutamic
acid were found to be 2.5% and 2.1% respectively. Against the background level of
aspartic acid (2.8% and 2.9% in UniHuman) and glutamic acid (2.6% and 2.9% in
ExpAll), the inside flank averages were found to be about 2–3 times lower than the
background level while the outside flank averages were comparable to the background
level (Figures 2C and 2D). Taken together, this indicates a clear suppression of negatively charged residues at the inside flank of single-pass TMHs and a possible trend
for negatively charged residues occurring preferentially at the outside flank. This is
not an effect of the flank definition selection since the trend remains the same when

2.4. RESULTS

35

using the database-defined flanks without the context of the TMH (Figure 2E & Figure 2F). For UniHuman (Figure 2E), the negative charge expectancy on the inside
flank doesnt reach above 2% until position -10 (D) and position -11 (E), whereas, on
the outside flank, both D and E start ¿ 2%. The same can be seen in ExpAll (Figure
2F) where negative residues reach above 2% only as far from the membrane boundary
as at position -9 (D) and position -7 (E) on the inside but exceed 2% beginning with
position 1 (D) and 3 (E) on the outside.
The observation of negative charge suppression at the inside flank, herein the
negative-inside depletion rule, is statistically significant throughout most datasets in
this study. The inside-outside bias was counted using the Kruskal-Wallis test comparing the occurrence of acidic residues within 10 residues of each TMH inside and
outside the TMH (Table 2). We studied both the database-reported flanks as well
as those obtained from central alignment of TMHs (see Methods). The null hypothesis (no difference between the two flanks) could be confidently rejected in all cases
(P-value¡0.001 except for UniBacilli), the sign of the H-statistic (Kruskal-Wallis) indicating suppression at the inside and/or preference for the outside flank (except for
UniArch). Most importantly, acidic residues were found to be distributed with bias in
ExpAll (P-value ¡3.47e-58) and in UniHuman (P-value 1̄.13e-93). Whereas with UniBacilli, the problem is most likely the dataset size, the exception of UniArch, for which
we observe a strong negative inside rule, is more puzzling and indicates biophysical
differences of their plasma-membrane.

2.4.3

Amino acid residue distribution analysis reveals a general negative charge bias signal in outside flank of multipass TMH segments — the negative outside enrichment
rule

As a result of the rarity of negatively charged residues, any distribution bias is difficult to be recognised in the plot showing the total abundance (or alignment column
composition) of residues in multi-pass TMHs and their flanks from UniHuman (Figure
3A) and ExpAll (Figure 3B). Yet, as with single-pass helices, the dominant general
leucine enrichment, as well as positive inside signal, can be identified with certainty.

36

CHAPTER 2. THE “NEGATIVE-OUTSIDE” RULE

When the residue occurrence is normalised by the total occurrence of this residue type
in the sequence regions studied (shown as a relative percentage of at each position for
multi-pass helices from UniHuman in Figure 3C/3E and ExpAll in Figure 3D/3F), the
bias in the distribution of any type of charged residues becomes visible.
With regard to the positive-inside preference, positively charged residues have a
background value of 2.0% for arginine and 2.2% for lysine in UniHuman, and 1.7%
for arginine and 1.9% for lysine in ExpAll. At the inside flank, this rises to 4.6%
for arginine and 4.1% for lysine in UniHuman and 4.6% for arginine and 4.2% for
lysine in ExpAll. The mean net charge at each position was calculated for multipass and single-pass datasets from UniHuman and ExpAll (Supplementary Figure S1).
The positive inside rule clearly becomes visible as the net charge has a positive skew
approximately between residues -10 and -25. What is noteworthy is that the peaks
found for single-pass helices were almost three times greater than those of multi-pass
helices. For single-pass TMHs, the peak is +0.30 at position -15 in UniHuman and
+0.31 at position -14 in ExpAll, whereas TMHs from multi-pass proteins had lower
peaks of +0.15 at position -13 in UniHuman and +0.10 at position -14 in ExpAll.
Thus, there is a positive charge bias towards the cytoplasmic side; yet, it is much
weaker for multi-pass than for single-pass TMHs.
Notably, a “negative outside enrichment” trend also can be seen from the distribution of the negatively charged residues, though with some effort (Table 3) as the effect
is also weaker than in the case of single-pass TMHs. We studied the flanks under four
conditions: (i) database-defined flanks without overlap between neighbouring TMHs,
(ii) flanks after central alignment of TMHs without flank overlap, (iii) database-defined
flanks but allowing overlap of flanks shared among neighbouring TMHs, (iv) same as
condition (ii) but only the subset of cases where there is at least half of the required
flank length at either side of the TMH. In UniHuman as calculated under condition
(i), aspartic acid is lower on the inside flank (2.3%) than on the outside flank (3.0%).
Glutamic acid is also lower at the inside flank (2.4%) than the 2.8% on the outside
flank (Figure 3C). Slight variations in defining the membrane boundary point do not
influence the trend (compare figures 3C and 3E). We find that, in all studied conditions, the UniHuman dataset delivers statistical significances (P-values: (i) 6.10e-34,
(ii) 5.43e-41, (iii) 3.00e-57, (iv) 5.60e-41) strongly supporting negative charge bias

2.4. RESULTS

37

(inside suppression/outside preference; see Table 3).
Surprisingly, the result could not straightforwardly be repeated with the considerably smaller ExpAll. Under condition (i), we find with ExpAll that aspartic acid has
a background level of 1.0%, an average of 2.6% on the inside flank, and of 2.9% on the
outside flank but glutamic acids background is 1.2% but 2.8% on the inside flank and
2.5% on the outside flank. Statistical tests do not support finding a negative charge
bias in conditions (i) and (ii). Apparently, the problem is TMHs having no or almost
no flanks at one of the sides. Statistical significance for the negative charge bias is
detected as soon as this problem is dealt with either by allowing extension of flanks
overlap among neighbouring TMHs as in condition (iii) or by kicking out examples
without proper flank lengths from the dataset as in condition (iv). The respective
P-values are 2.05e-6 and 9.81e-15 respectively.
The issues we had with ExpAll raised the question that, maybe, sequence redundancy in the UniHuman set could have played a role. Therefore, we repeated all
calculations but with UniRef50 instead of UniRef90 for mapping into sequence clusters (see Methods section for detail). We were surprised to see that harsher sequence
redundancy requirements do not affect the outcome of the statistical tests in any major way. For the conditions (i)- (iv), we computed the following P-values: (i) 1.31e-28
(5940 negatively residues inside versus 7492 outside), (ii) 1.38e-36 (5516 versus 7320),
(iii) 5.60e-53 (7089 versus 9233) and (iv) 4.18e-41 (4232 versus 5730).
So, the amplifying effect of some subsets in the overall dataset on the statistical
test that might be caused by allowing overlapping flanks (condition (iii)) is not the
major factor leading to the negative charge skew. Similarly, the trend is also not
caused by sequence redundancy. Thus, we have learned that the negative charge bias
does also exist in multi-pass TMPs but under the conditions that there are sufficiently
long loops between TMHs. Bluntly said: no loops equals to no charge bias. As
soon as the loops reach some critical length, there are differences between single-pass
and multi-pass TMHs with regard to occurrence and distribution of negative charges
and the inside-suppression/outside-enrichment negative charge bias appears. Not only
are there more negative charges within the multi-pass TMH itself (in fact, negative
charges are almost not tolerated in single-pass TMHs; see Table 1), but also, there is
a much stronger negative outside skew in the TMHs of single-pass proteins than those

38

CHAPTER 2. THE “NEGATIVE-OUTSIDE” RULE

of multi-pass proteins.

2.4.4

Further significant sequence differences between singlepass and multi-pass helices: distribution of tryptophan,
tyrosine, proline and cysteine

Amino acid residue profiles along the TM segment and its flanks differ between singleand multi-pass TMHs also in other aspects. The relative percentages of all amino acid
types (normalization by the total amount of that residue type in the sequence segment)
from single-pass helices of the UniHuman (Figure 4A; from 1705 TMHs with flanks
having 68571 residues) and ExpAll (Figure 4B; from 1544 TMHs with flanks having
60200 residues) were plotted as a heatmap. The amino acid types were listed on the Y
axis according to Kyte & Doolittle hydrophobicity [Kyte1982] in descending order.
In accordance with expectations, enrichment for hydrophobic residues in the TMH,
for the positively charged residues on the inside flank as well as a distribution the negative distribution bias was found in both datasets. Additionally, the inside interfacial
region showed consistent enrichment hotspots for tryptophan (e.g., 7.1% at position
-11 in ExpAll, 6.2% at position -10 in UniHuman with flanks after central TMH alignment) and tyrosine (6.4% at -11 in ExpAll, 7.1% at -11 in UniHuman), and some
preference can also be seen for the outer interfacial region (e.g., 5.2% at position 11
for tryptophan in ExpAll, and 5.8% at position 10 for tryptophan in UniHuman) albeit the hot cluster of the outer flank covers fewer positions than that of the inner
flank. Further, there is an apparent bias of cysteine on the inner flank and interfacial
region (e.g., 5.5% at position -10 in ExpAll, 5.9% at position -11 in UniHuman), and a
depression in the outer interfacial region and flank (up to a minimum of 0.3% in both
ExpAll and UniHuman). Proline appears to have a depression signal on the outer
flank. Note that, in a similar way to Figures 2 and 3, the distributions of the flanks
derived from centrally aligned TMHs are corroborated by the distributions from the
database defined TMH boundary flanks (see outside bands in Figures 4A-D).
A similar heatmap was generated for UniHuman multi-pass (Figure 4C; from 12353
TMHs with flanks having 452708 residues) TMHs and ExpAll multi-pass (Figure 4D;

2.4. RESULTS

39

from 15563 TMHs with flanks having 535599 residues). Whereas Figures 4A-C appear quite noisy, the plot for ExpAll multi-pass TMHs appears almost Gaussian-like
smoothed, thus, indicating the quality of this dataset. Tyrosine and tryptophan in
the multi-pass case do not appear as enriched in the interfacial regions of single-pass
TMHs from both UniHuman and ExpAll. Prolines are only suppressed in the TMH
itself and are not suppressed in the outer flank as in the single-pass case but, indeed,
are tolerated if not slightly enriched in the flanks.

2.4.5

Hydrophobicity and leucine distribution in TMHs in
single- and multi-pass proteins

Generally, we see in Figure 4 that compositional biases appear more extreme in the
single-pass case, particularly when it comes to polar and non-polar residues being
more heavily suppressed and enriched. To investigate this observation, we calculated the hydrophobicity at each sequence-position averaged over all TMHs considered (after having window-averaged over 3 residues for each TMH) using the Kyte
& Doolittle hydrophobicity scale [Kyte1982] (Figure 5A) and validated using White
and Wimley octanol-interface whole residue scale [White1999], Hessas biological hydrophobicity scale [Hessa2005], and the Eisenberg hydrophobic moment consensus
scale [Eisenberg1984] (Supplementary Figure S2). The total set of TMHs was split
into 15 sets of membrane-spanning proteins (1 set containing single-pass proteins, 13
sets each containing TMHs from 2-, 3-, 4-. . . 14-TMPs and another of TMHs from
proteins with 15 or more TMHs). In Figure 5B, we show the P-value at each sequence
position by comparing the respective values from multi-pass and single-pass TMHs
using the 2-sample t-test (Figure 5B). Strikingly, the inside flank of the single-pass
TMHs is much more hydrophilic (e.g., see the Kyte & Doolittle score -̄1.3 at position
-18) than that of multi-pass TMHs (P-value5̄.64e-103 at position -14). Most likely,
the positive inside rule, along with the interfacial clustering of tryptophan and tyrosine, contribute to a strong polar inside flank in single-pass helices that is not present
in multi-pass helices en masse. Further, multi-pass TMHs cluster remarkably closely
within the TM core; the respective hydrophobicity is apparently not dependent on the
number of TMHs in a given multi-pass TMP. On average, single-pass TMHs are more

40

CHAPTER 2. THE “NEGATIVE-OUTSIDE” RULE

hydrophobic in the core than multi-pass TMHs (P-value¡1.e-72 within positions -55
and P-value5̄.92e-190 at position 0). On the other hand, hydrophobicity differences
between TMHs from single- and multi-pass proteins fade somewhat at the transition
towards the flanks (P-value 1̄.85e-4 at position -10, and P-value 3̄.35e-31 at position
10).

Leucine is the most abundant residue in TMHs (Figure 1) and is considered one
of the most hydrophobic residues by all hydrophobicity scales. Therefore, it plays a
very influential role in TMH helix-helix and lipid-helix interactions in the membrane
and recognition by the insertion machinery. When looking at the difference in the
abundance of leucine between the inner and outer halves, we find that TMHs from
single-pass proteins have a trend to contain more leucine residues at the cytoplasmic
side of TMHs, particularly in the case of TMHs from single-pass proteins (see Figures
2 and 4).

This trend is statistically significant for TMHs in many biological membranes (Table 4, Figure 6). In the most extreme case of UniCress (single-pass), we see 49% more
leucine residues on the inside leaflet than the outside leaflet (P-value 5̄.41e-24). This
contrasts with UniCress (multi-pass), in which the skew is far weaker, albeit yet statistically significant. There are 6% more leucine residues at the inside half (P-value
2̄.08e-4). The trend of having more leucine residues at the cytoplasmic half of the
TMH is observed for all datasets (both single- and multi-pass) except for UniArch
(single-pass). The phenomenon is statistically significant with P-value¡1.e-3 for ExpAll, UniHuman, UniPM and UniCress (both single- and multi-pass). As with negative
charge distribution, UniArch presents a reversed effect compared to other single-pass
protein datasets with a 57% reduction in leucine on the inside leaflet compared to the
outside leaflet (P-value 7̄.25e-6). However, leucine of TMHs from UniArch multi-pass
proteins have no discernible preference for the inside leaflets (4% more on the inside
leaflet, P-value 0̄.625).

2.4. RESULTS

2.4.6

41

A negative-outside (or negative-non-inside) signal is present
across many membrane types

We explored the presence of amino acid residue compositional skews described above
for human TMPs for those in other taxa and also specifically for human proteins
with regard to membranes at various subcellular localisations. Acidic residues for
TMHs from single-pass and multi-pass helices were plotted according to their relative
percentage distributions (of the total amount of this residue type in the respective
segment) for five taxon-specific datasets UniCress (Figure 6A), UniFungi (Figure 6B),
UniEcoli (Figure 6C), UniBacilli (Figure 6D), UniArch (Figure 6E) and for three
organelle-specific datasets UniER (Figure 6F), UniGolgi (Figure 6G), UniPM (Figure
6H).
For single-pass proteins in all taxon-specific datasets (with the exception of UniArch),
there are more negative residues at the outside than at the inside. The skew is statistically significant (see Table 2, P¡0.001) except for UniBacilli. Despite statistical significance found for UniFungi (P-value 1̄.12e-7 for database-defined and P-value6̄.79e-10
for flanks after central alignment; Table 2), however, the trend is not very strong in
this case (Figure 6B). Whereas the skew is just a suppression of negatively charged
residues at the inside flank for ExpAll and UniHuman (as well as in UniCress), the
bias observed for UniEcoli involves also a negative charge enrichment at the outside
flank. In the case of UniArch (Figure 6E), we see a negative inside preference that is
6.0% in the case of aspartic acid, and 6.3% for glutamic acid (not shown), with much
lower values close to 0% on the outside. Whilst the difference is statistically significant
for both TMHs (Table 2) from single-pass proteins (P-value1̄.83e-12 and P-value1̄.43e11 for two versions of flank determination) and multi-pass proteins (P-values 4.72e-3,
7.81e-3, 1.28e-4 for three versions of flank determination, see Tables 3A and 3B), the
distribution along the position axis is heavily fluctuating, maybe as a result of the small
size of the dataset. However, one can assuredly assign a negative-inside tendency to
the flanking regions of Archaean TMHs.
In the human organelle datasets, we see trend shifts at different stages in the
secretory pathway. In UniER, there is an enrichment of negative charge on the outside
flank of 1–1.5% that is comparable to the magnitude of the positive inside signal. In

42

CHAPTER 2. THE “NEGATIVE-OUTSIDE” RULE

UniGolgi, there is a suppression of negatively charged residues on the inside flank as
well as an enrichment on the inside flank resulting in ∼2% distribution difference. For
UniPM, there is a negative-inside suppression (but no outside enrichment) as well as
a positive-inside signal. All observed trends are statistically significant (see Table 2,
P¡1.e-5).
For multi-pass TMH proteins, we see either the same trends but in a weaker form or
no skews are observed at all as inspection of the graphs in Figure 6 shows. For datasets
UniER, UniGolgi, UniCress, UniFungi, and UniBacilli, the hypothesis of equal distribution of negatively charged residues cannot be rejected (P-value¿0.001, see Table 3);
thus, a skew is statistically non-significant. Although UniPM has a statistically significant bias (P-value¡4.30e-12, Table 3), the trends are more subtle and most present for
aspartic acid of UniPM. We see many more negative and positive charges tolerated
within the multi-pass TMHs themselves throughout all datasets (Table 1). To note,
there is a positive-inside rule for all multi-pass datasets studied herein.
To conclude, we find that negative-charge bias distribution is a feature of singlepass protein TMHs that is present across many membrane types and it can have the
form of a negative charge suppression at the inside flank or an enrichment of those
charges at the outside flank.

2.4.7

Amino acid compositional skews in relation to TMH
complexity and anchorage function

In previous work, we studied the relationship of TMH composition, sequence complexity and function [Wong2010, Wong2011, Wong2012] and concluded that simple
TMHs are more probably responsible for simple membrane anchorage, whereas complex TMHs have a biological function beyond just anchorage. We wished to see how
the skews observed in this work relate to that classification. Therefore, the single-pass
TMHs from UniHuman and ExpAll were separated into subsets of simple, twilight, and
complex TMHs using TMSOC [Wong2011, Wong2012]. The relative percentages
of eight residue types (L, D, E, R, K, Y, W, C; normalisation with the total amount
of residues of that amino acid type in all sequence segments considered) were plotted
along the sequence position for simple and complex helices (Figure 7). Of UniHuman

2.4. RESULTS

43

single-pass proteins, there were 889 records with simple TMHs and 570 with complex
TMHs (Figure 7B). In ExpAll, 769 TMHs from single-pass proteins were simple TMHs
and 570 were complex TMHs.
It is visually apparent (Figure 7) that there are (i) stronger skews and more insideoutside disparities in simple single-pass TMs than in complex single-pass TMs and (ii)
greater similarities between single-pass complex TM regions and those from multi-pass
proteins compared with simple single-pass TMs in comparison with either of the other
two distributions. To examine the statistical significance of these observations, we
compared the amino acid distributions (K, R, K+R, D, E, D+E, Y, W, L, C) across
the range of TMHs with flank lengths 10 residues using the Kolmogorov-Smirnov (KS),
Kruskal-Wallis (KW) and the χ2 statistical tests. To note, the KS test scrutinises for
significant maximal absolute differences between distribution curves; the glskw test is
after skews between distributions and the χ2 statistical test checks the average difference between distributions. Calculations were carried out over single-pass complex,
single-pass simple and multi-pass TMH datasets from both ExpAll and UniHuman
(for P-values and Bahadur slopes, Table 5 (dataset UniHuman) and Table 6 (dataset
ExpAll)).
Many low P-values in Tables 5 and 6 indicate significant differences between the
three distributions studied. For the UniHuman dataset (Table 5), we find most striking, significant differences between charged residue distributions (R, K, D, E) of simple and complex single-pass TMH+flank regions (χ2 P-value¡2.23e-3 for single amino
acid types). Similarly, simple single-pass TMH+flank segments differ significantly
from multi-pass TMH+flank segments (KW test P-values¡3.e-2 for R, K, D, E, Y, W
amino acid types as well as for K+R and D+E). The trends are the same for the
ExpAll dataset (Table 6): simple and complex single-pass TMH+flank regions differ
in charged amino acid type distributions (χ2 P-value¡4.21e-3 for all cases), as well as
simple single-pass and multi-pass ones, do (KW test P-values¡5.e-2 for R, D, E, Y, W
amino acid types and D+E).
Whereas P-value tests for significant differences between distributions depend strongly
on the amount of data, the more informative Bahadur slopes that measure the distance from the zero hypothesis are independent of the amount of data (55–57). As
we can see in Tables 5 and 6, the absolute Bahadur slopes for the simple single-pass

44

CHAPTER 2. THE “NEGATIVE-OUTSIDE” RULE

to multi-pass comparison are always larger (even by at least an order of magnitude):
(ii) for all three statistical tests applied (χ2 , KS and KW), (ii) for all amino acid
types, for K+R and E+D and (iii) for both datasets UniHuman and ExpAll. Thus,
complex single-pass TMH+flanks have compositional properties that are indeed very
similar to those of multi-pass ones (which are known to have a large fraction of complex TMHs [Wong2011, Wong2012]). This strong evidence implies that the actual
issue is not so much about single- and multi-pass TMH segments but between simple
and complex TMHs where the first are exclusively guided by the anchor requirements
whereas the latter have more complex restraints to fulfil.

Several distribution features of simple TMHs from single-pass proteins when compared to complex TMHs from single-pass proteins and TMHs from multi-pass proteins
that contribute to the statistical differences (Figure 7) are especially notable. There
is a more pronounced trend for positively charged residues and tyrosine to be preferentially located on the inside flanks and for negatively charged residues to be on
the outside flanks. The symmetrical peaks in the percentage distribution of tyrosine
in complex single-pass TMHs are more akin to multi-pass TMHs, whereas in simple
TMHs the distribution resembles a more typical single-pass helix (compare with Figure
3). Furthermore, the depression of charged residues within the TMH itself is strongest
in simple single-pass TMHs.

To emphasise, tryptophan is essentially not tolerated within the simple TMHs and
there are higher peaks of tryptophan occurrence at either flank. We also see a strong
inside skew for leucine clustering within the core of simple TMHs which is not present
in the flatter distributions of complex single-pass TMHs and TMHs from multi-pass
proteins.

There is obviously a cysteine-inside preference for simple, single-pass TMHs but
less in complex, multi-pass TMHs (Figure 7). This conclusion is contrary to a previous
study [Nakashima1992] but that deduction was drawn from a much smaller dataset
of 45 single-pass TMHs and 24 multi-pass TMPs.

2.5. DISCUSSION

2.5

45

Discussion

The “negative-outside/non-negative inside” skew in TMHs and their flanks is statistically significant We have seen that, consistently throughout the datasets, there is
a trend for generally rare negatively charged residues to prefer the outside flank of a
TMH rather than the inside (and to almost completely avoid the TMH itself); be it
by suppression on the inside and/or enrichment on the outside. The trend is much
stronger in single-pass protein datasets than in multi-pass protein datasets. However
as we elaborated on further, the real crux of the bias appears to be associated with
the TMH being simple or complex [Wong2011, Wong2012], thus, whether or not
the TMH has a role beyond anchorage. The existence of this bias has implications
for topology prediction of proteins with TMHs, engineering membrane proteins as
well as for models of protein transport via membranes and protein-membrane stability
considerations.
It should be noted that the controversy in the scientific community about the
existence of a negative charge bias at TMHs was mainly with regard to multi-pass
TMPs. Despite having access to much larger, better annotated sequence datasets and
many more 3D structures than our predecessors, we also had our share of difficulties
here (see Results section III and Table 3). The straightforward approach results in
inconclusive statistical tests if datasets become small (for example, if selections are
restricted to subcellular localizations, 3D structures or if very harsh sequence redundancy criteria are applied) and, especially, if TMHs with very short or no flanks are
included. Therefore in the case of multi-pass proteins, we studied flanks as taken from
the TM boundaries in the databases under several conditions: (i) without allowing
flank overlap between neighbouring TMHs, (ii) as subset of (i) but with requiring
some minimal flank length at either side, (iii) with overlapping flanks. We also studied flanks after central alignment of TMHs and assuming standardized TMH length.
Multi-pass TMHs (without overlapping flanks) do not show statistically significant
negative charge bias under condition (i) but, apparently, due to many TMHs without
any or super-short flanks at least at one side. Significance appears as soon as subsets
of TMHs with flanks at both sides are studied. Not surprisingly, there is no charge bias
if there are no flanks in the first place. It is perhaps worth noting that the results from

46

CHAPTER 2. THE “NEGATIVE-OUTSIDE” RULE

multi-pass TMHs with overlapping flanks may involve amplification of skews since it
involves multiple counting of the same residues. Given the redundancy threshold of
UniRef90, we cannot rule out that these statistical skews are the result of a trend from
only a small sub-group of TMPs which is being amplified. Hence, we also needed to
observe if these same observed biases were true in condition (ii), which is indeed the
case.
As the “negative-outside/negative-not-inside” skew is widely observed among varying taxa and subcellular localisations with statistical significance, it appears to, at
least to a certain extent, be caused by physical reasons and be associated with the
background membrane potential. Several earlier considerations and observation support this thought: (i) Firstly, a concert between the negative and positive charge
on the TMH flanks drives anchorage and the direction of insertion of engineered
TMHs [Sipos1993, Hartmann1989]. (ii) The inner leaflet of the plasmalemma
tends to be more negatively charged [Zachowski1993]. Specifically, phosphatidylserine was found to distribute in the cytosolic leaflets of the plasma membrane and
it was found to electrostatically interact with moderately positive-charged proteins
enough to redirect the proteins into the endocytic pathway [Yeung2008]. The negative charge of proteins at the inside of the plasma-membrane would decrease the
anchoring potency of the TMH via electrostatic repulsion. (iii) Thirdly in membranes that maintain a membrane potential, there are inevitably electrical forces acting on charged residues during chain translocation as this influences the translocon
machinery when orienting the TMH. Therefore, it is no surprise that we see an insideoutside bias for negatively charged residues that is opposite to the one for positively
charged residues. The negative charges in TMH residues have been shown to experience an electrical pulling force as they pass through the bacterial SecYEG translocon
import [Ismail2012, Ismail2015]. Also, they are known to be involved in intramembrane helix-helix interactions [Meindl-Beinker2006]. For example, aspartic
acid and glutamic acid can drive efficient di- or trimerisation of TMHs in lipid bilayers and, furthermore, that aspartic acid interactions with neighbouring TMHs can
directly increase insertion efficiency of marginally hydrophobic TMHs via the Sec61
translocon [Meindl-Beinker2006]. In support of this, less acidic residues are found
in single-pass TMHs, among which only some will undergo intra-membrane helix-helix

2.5. DISCUSSION

47

interactions. As the mutation studies have shown negative charge as a topological determinant [Nilsson1990], therefore, it is perhaps no surprise that we observe a skew
in negatively charged residues in a similar manner to the skew in positively charged
residues.
Whereas the “negative-outside/negative-not-inside” skew is observed for distantly
related eukaryotic species and it is also present in Gram-negative bacteria such as
E. coli, this sequence pattern was not observed for the Gram-positive bacteria in
which there is no observable bias. In contrast, Archaea have a statistically significant
negative-inside propensity both for single- and multi-pass TM proteins. It is known
that Archaea have remarkably different membranes compared to other kingdoms of
life due to their extremophile adaptations to stress [Oger2013]. Whilst it is unclear
why negative charge is distributed so differently in UniArch to the other taxonomic
datasets, one must appreciate that a much more nuanced approach would be needed
to draw formal conclusions about Archaea, which current databases cannot provide
due to the relatively limited information and annotation of Archaean proteomes.
Methodological issues made previous studies struggle to identify negatively charged
skews with statistical significance
Whereas the influence of a negative charge bias in engineered proteins with TM regions on the direction of insertion into the membrane was solidly established [Nilsson1990,
Andersson1993, Kim1994, Andersson1992, Rutz1999], the search for the negative charge distribution pattern in the statistics of sequences of TM proteins from
databases failed to find significance for the expected negative charge skew [Sharpe2010,
Baeza-Delgado2013, Granseth2005, Pogozheva2013, Nilsson2005, Andersson1992].
Generally speaking, the datasets from previous studies have been considerably
smaller compared with those in our work (only Sharpe et al. had a similar order of
magnitude [Sharpe2010]), especially those with experimental information about 3D
structure and membrane topology that we used for validation. And they might not
have had the luxury of using UniProts improved TRANSMEM consensus annotation
based on a multitude of TM prediction methods and experimental data, but this is
also not the major issue. We found that there are other factors that are critical for
observing sequence bias such as negative charge skew in the case of TMHs.
i Acidic residues are rare near and within TMH and biases in their distribution

48

CHAPTER 2. THE “NEGATIVE-OUTSIDE” RULE
are easily blurred by minor fluctuations of much more frequent amino acid types,
most notably leucine. Therefore, the method of normalisation is critical. We have
shown that normalising by the total amount of residues of the amino acid type
studied within the sequence region under consideration is appropriate to answer
the question where to find a negatively charged residue if there is any at all (called
relative percentage in this work).

ii The alignment of the TMHs is critical. It was common practice to align TMH
according to the most cytosolic residue [Sharpe2010] although it is known that
the membrane/cytosol boundary of the TMH is not well defined (and the exact
boundary is even less well understood at the non-cytosolic side). Aligning the TM
regions and their flanks from the center of the TMH was first proposed by BaezaDelgado et al. [Baeza-Delgado2013]. Since we know now that acidic residues are
often suppressed in the cytosolic flank and within the TMH, this implies that the
few acidic residues found in the cytosolic interface would appear more comparable
to those in the poorly defined non-cytosolic interface as the respective residues are
spread over more potential positions, diminishing any observable bias.
iii We find that separation into single- and multi-pass TM datasets (or, even better,
simple and complex TMHs [Wong2011, Wong2012]) is critical to study the inside/outside bias. As many TMHs in multi-pass TMPs have essentially no flanks
or very short flanks if the condition of non-overlap is applied to flanks of neighbouring TMHs, this might also obscure the observation of the negative charge bias.
If there are no flanks, then there will be no residue distribution bias in these flanks.
The problem can be alleviated by either studying only subsets with minimal flank
lengths on both sides (although datasets might become too small for statistical
analysis) or by allowing flank overlaps between neighbouring TMHs.
iv This classification is even more justified in the light of previous reports about the
missing hydrophobicity in multi-pass TMHs [Nilsson1990, Hedin2010, Hessa2007,
Ojemalm2012]. Otherwise, the distribution bias well observed among the exclusive anchors could be lost to noise. This addresses the more biologically contextualised issue that there are different evolutionary pressures on different types of

2.5. DISCUSSION

49

TMHs. The negative charge skew is most pronounced for dedicated anchors frequently found with simple TMHs typically observed in single-pass TM proteins.
These TMHs are pressured to exhibit residue biases that may aid anchorage in a
topologically correct manner. Complex TMHs, typically within multi-pass membrane proteins that have a function beyond anchorage, comply with a multitude
of restraints structural and functional constraints and the negative charge skew is
just one of them.
The most representative precedent papers are those of Sharpe et al. [Sharpe2010]
from 2010 (with 1192 human and 1119 yeast single-pass TMHs), Baeza-Delgado et
al. [Baeza-Delgado2013] (with 792 TMHs mixed from single- and multi-pass glstmps)
and Pogozheva et al. [Pogozheva2013] (TMHs from 191 mixed from single- and multipass TMPs with structural information) both from 2013. Whereas the first analysis
would have benefitted from the central alignment approach and the first two studies from another normalization as described above, the third study did come close to
our findings. To note, their dataset mixed with single- and multi-pass proteins was
too small for revealing the negative charge bias with significance; yet, they observed
total charge differences at either sides of the membrane varying for both single- and
multi-pass proteins. Membrane asymmetry due to positively charged residues occurring more frequently on the cytosolic side causes net charge unevenness at both sides
of the membrane. This observation has been known to correlate with orientation for
decades [VonHeijne1989, Baeza-Delgado2013, Meindl-Beinker2006]. Our data
shows that the negative charge skew contributes to this asymmetry.
There are differences in charged amino acid residue biases in TMH flanks through
each stage of the secretory pathway
Here, we observe differences throughout sub-cellular locations along the secretory
pathway. We found that negative charges are enriched at the outside flank (in the
ER), both enriched outside and suppressed inside for the Golgi membrane, and suppressed on the inside flank in the Plasma Membrane (PM). It has been suggested
that the leaflets of different membranes have different lipid compositions throughout the secretory pathway [VanMeer2008] and this has led to general biochemical
conservation in terms of TMH length and amino acid composition in different membranes [Sharpe2010, Pogozheva2013].

50

CHAPTER 2. THE “NEGATIVE-OUTSIDE” RULE
Lipid asymmetry in the Golgi and PM (in contrast to the ER) has been known

about for over a decade [Daleke2007, Devaux2004]. To note, the Golgi and PM
have lipid asymmetry with sphingomyelin and glycosphingolipids on the non-cytosolic
leaflet, and phosphatidylserine and phosphatidylethanolamine enriched in the cytosolic
leaflet. Although the ER is the main site for cholesterol synthesis, it has markedly
low concentrations of sphingolipids [Bell1981]. Golgi synthesises sphingomyelin, a
lipid not present in the ER, but present in both the Golgi [Futerman2005] and
in the PM [Li2007, Tafesse2007]. The PM is also enriched with densely packed
sphingolipids and sterols [DiPaolo2006]. Another factor influencing the sequence
patterns of TMHs and their along the secretory pathway appears to be the variation
in membrane potentials [Qin2011, Worley1994, Schapiro2000].
Several sequence features can be assigned to anchor TMHs: Charged-residue flank
biases, leucine intra-helix asymmetry, and the aromatic belt.
We investigated the difference between TMHs from single-pass and multi-pass
proteins and found significant differences in sequence composition that are reflective of the biologically different roles the TMHs play. To emphasise and validate
these findings, we separated TMHs from single-pass proteins into simple and complex
TMHs [Wong2011, Wong2012]; ones that likely contains mostly TMHs that act as
exclusive anchors, and another that have roles beyond anchorage. This leaves us with
“anchors” (simple TMHs from single-pass proteins) and non-anchors (complex TMHs
from single-pass proteins, and TMHs from multi-pass proteins). If there are strong
sequence feature differences between anchors and non-anchors, it is likely that the sequence feature has a role in satisfying membrane constraints to act as an energetically
optimally stable anchor.
Future studies in the area would desirably directly include a comprehensive analyses
of datasets oligomerised TMHs from single-pass proteins and ascertain if they appear
to be more similar to simple anchors, multi-pass, or generally neither. Currently, no
sufficiently complete set of intra-membrane oligomerised single-pass proteins exists
that can be compared to a large set of known non-oligomerising proteins. The current
work sidesteps this issue by comparing single-pass proteins with simple TMHs, which
tend to be simple anchors (as shown in previous work [Wong2011, Wong2012]),
against datasets that contain TMHs that will form intra-membrane bundles. Bluntly,

2.5. DISCUSSION

51

the simple/complex status of a TMH can be easily computed from its sequence with
TMSOC whereas the oligomerisation state of most membrane proteins still needs to
be experimentally determined.
Unsurprisingly, both positively and negatively charged residues can be seen to be
more strongly distributed with bias in anchors than non-anchors. Both the positiveinside rule as well as the negative-outside/non-negative-inside bias are mostly observable in simple single-pass TMHs (although they are statistically significant elsewhere).
It is perhaps true that where a bias is clearly present in both non-anchors and anchors
alike, it is a strong topological determinant, whereas if the residue is only distributed
with topological bias in exclusively anchoring TMHs, we can attribute these features
more specifically to biophysical anchorage. This being said, we should not rule out
that the same features aid topological determination since negative charge has been
shown to be a weaker topological determinant than positively charged residues (35).
Tyrosine and tryptophan residues commonly are found at the interfacial boundaries
of the TMH and this feature is called the “aromatic belt” [Sharpe2010, Baeza-Delgado,
Granseth2005, Nilsson2005, Hessa2005] and this was thought to be caused by
their affinity to the carbonyl groups in the lipid bilayer [Kilian2000]. Not all types of
aromatic residues are found in the aromatic belt; phenylalanine has no particular preference for this region [Granseth2005, Braun1999]. It is still unclear if the aromatic
belt has to do with anchorage or with translocon recognition [Baeza-Delgado2013].
Here, TMHs with exclusively anchorage functions showed stronger preferences for the
W and Y in the aromatic belt region, otherwise known as the water-lipid interface
region than TMHs with function beyond anchorage. This is strong evidence that the
aromatic belt indeed assists with anchorage, and is less conserved where the TMH
must conform to other restraints beyond membrane anchorage. Furthermore, we see
that the tyrosine’s preference for the inside interface region also appears to be to do
with anchorage and this trend is somewhat true for tryptophan, too.
Finally, our findings corroborate earlier reports that many multi-pass TMHs are
much less hydrophobic than typical single-pass TMH and about 30% of them fail the
hydrophobicity requirements of ∆G TMH insertion prediction (“missing hydrophobicity”) [Hessa2005, Hedin2010, Hessa2007, Ojeman2012]. We also find that the

52

CHAPTER 2. THE “NEGATIVE-OUTSIDE” RULE

leucine skew and the hydrophobic asymmetry towards the cytosolic leaflet of the membrane is more pronounced in simple, single-pass TMHs than in complex or multi-pass
ones; thus, it appears to be another anchoring feature. It was found previously that
the hydrophobic profiles of TMHs of multi-pass proteins share similar hydrophobicity
profiles on average irrespective of the number of TMHs and TMHs from single-pass
proteins have been found to be typically more hydrophobic than TMHs from multi-pass
proteins [Wong2011]. Sharpe et al. [Sharpe2010] report an asymmetric hydrophobic length for single-pass TMHs. Our study reiterates the hydrophobic asymmetry
and attributes it mainly to the leucine distribution. The leucine asymmetry might be
linked to the different lipid composition of either leaflet of biological membranes.

In summary, three key features can be assigned to aiding TMH stability in the membrane (Figure 8): (i) charge, (ii) the aromatic belt, and (iii) leucine leaflet preference.
What is most novel here is that each of these features are furthermore distributed with
preference for a particular side of the bilayer in the case of anchoring TMHs. These
differences in inside-outside topology that are most present in anchoring TMHs further
supports the notion that there are broad lipid compositional differences between the
inner and outer leaflets of the bilayers [Sharpe2010]. Furthermore, while some TMHs
conform and complement to the properties of the bilayer, other TMHs with function
beyond anchorage are less constrained to biophysically complement the bilayer. For
these TMHs, any advantage gained by adhering to the membrane restrictions is outweighed by more complicated protein dynamics, topological frustration and protein
functional requirements.

To conclude, the large fraction of functionally uncharacterised genomic sequences is
the great bottleneck in life sciences at this moment that hinders many biomedical and
biotechnological applications, some with tremendous societal need [Eisenhaber2012,
Kuznetsov2013]. Among these uncharacterised genomic regions, there is ∼10000
protein-coding genes, especially many membrane-embedded proteins. It is hoped that
the NNI/NO-rule as well as the other sequence properties of membrane anchoring
TMHs described in this article will add new insights for membrane protein function
discovery, design and engineering.

2.6. METHODS

2.6

Methods

2.6.1

Datasets

53

Databases.
All datasets used for analysis are listed in Table 1. Transmembrane protein sequences
and annotations were taken from TOPDB [50] and UniProt [49]. UniProt derived
datasets are the most comprehensive datasets built with (i) robust transmembrane
prediction methods providing the limit of todays achievable accuracy with regard to
hydrophobic core localization and (ii) subcellular location annotation that can be used
for orientation determination. However, they mostly rely on predicted transmembrane
regions. TOPDB has meticulous experimental verifications of the orientation from
the literature that are independent of prediction algorithms [50]. Unfortunately, this
dataset is much smaller with too few entries to have it divided with regard to taxonomy
or subcellular locations.
UniProt database files were downloaded by querying the server for different taxonomic groups as well as different subcellular membrane locations; UniHuman (human
representative proteome), UniCress (Arabidopsis thaliana, otherwise known as mouse
eared cress, representative proteome), UniER (human endoplasmic reticulum representative proteome), UniPM (human plasma membrane representative proteome),
UniGolgi (human Golgi representative proteome). To enforce a level of quality control,
the queries were restricted to manually reviewed records and transmembrane proteins
with manually asserted TRANSMEM annotation[49]. Proteins were then sorted into
multi-pass and single-pass groups according to having more than one or exactly one
TRANSMEM region respectively. TRANSMEM regions are validated by either experimental evidence[49], or according to a robust transmembrane consensus of the
predictors TMHMM [23], Memsat [80], Phobius [21,22] and the hydrophobic moment
plot method of Eisenberg and co-workers[54]. TMHs and flanking regions were oriented
according to UniProt TOPO DOM annotation according to the keyword cytoplasmic.
If a cytoplasmic TOPO DOM was found in the previous TOPO DOM relative to the
TRANSMEM region then the sequence remained the same. If cytoplasmic was found
in the next TOPO DOM, relative to the TRANSMEM section then the sequence was

54

CHAPTER 2. THE “NEGATIVE-OUTSIDE” RULE

reversed. Proteins without the cytoplasmic keyword in their TOPO DOM annotation
were omitted from further analysis.
The TOPDB database[50] is a manually curated database composed of experimental records from the literature that allow determination of the protein topology.
Experiments include fusion proteins, posttranslational modifications, protease experiments, immunolocalization, chemical modifications as well as revertants, sequence
motifs with known mandatory membrane-embedded topologies, and tailoring mutants
(Supplementary Table S1). Length cut-offs for the TMH were set at 16 as the shortest
length and 38 as the longest.
The following datasets are used throughout this work: ExpAll. TOPDB contained
4190 manually annotated transmembrane proteins at the time of download[50]. CDHIT[81] identified 3857 representative sequences using sequence clusters of ¿90
To get an idea of the taxonomical breakdown in the ExpAll dataset, the UniProt
ID tags were extracted and mapped to UniProtKB. The combined dataset of multipass (single-pass) proteins was mapped to 1288 (1343) eukaryotic records, 404 (776)
of which were human records, 926 (191) bacterial records, 46 (5) archaea records, and
14 (22) viral records.
UniHuman. This is a set of mostly human TMH-containing proteins or their close
mammalian homologues. UniProtKB contains 5187 human protein records that are
manually annotated with TRANSMEM regions (query = annotation:(type:transmem)
AND reviewed:yes AND organism:”Homo sapiens (Human) [9606]” AND proteome:up000005640.
To reduce sequence redundancy, these sequences were submitted to UniRef90[82]. To
note, Uniref90 was chosen over Uniref50 to maintain a viable size of datasets for statistical analysis of occurrence of negatively charged residue, which are very rare in the
vicinity of TMHs. 5015 UniRef90 clusters represented the 5187 sequences. A list of
sequences representing those clusters was submitted back to UniProtKB resulting and
5014 representative entries were recovered. There is a small issue in that the list of
representatives from UniRef includes non-canonical isoforms, while the batch retrieve
query of UniProtKB only supports complete entries, i.e. canonical isoforms. This
resulted in the loss of one record at this point is due to two splice isoforms acting as
representative identifiers. Of those 5014 records, 4714 were records from human entries, 197 were from mice, 94 from rats, 5 from bovine, 2 from chimps, 1 from Chinese

2.6. METHODS

55

hamsters, and 1 from pigs. Although the TMH length variations within the UniHuman dataset are much smaller than for ExpAll, we applied the same length cut-offs
for the sake of comparability. Out of the 1709 single-pass cases, 1705 entered the final
dataset. Of those, 1596 were from human records, 87 were from mouse, 19 were from
rat, and 2 were from chimpanzee. Among the 12390 multi-pass TMHs, 12353 were included into UniHuman. The other, multi-pass record identifiers were mapped to 1789
UniProtKB entries. 1660 of these were human entries, 63 from rat, 61 from mouse,
4 from bovine, and 1 from Chinese hamster. This clustered human dataset was then
queried for subcellular locations to make the UniER, UniGolgi, and UniPM datasets
(detailed below).
UniER. The clustered UniHuman dataset was queried using UniProtKB for endoplasmic reticulum subcellular location (locations:(location:”Endoplasmic reticulum
[SL-0095]” evidence:manual)). This returned 487 protein entries, 457 of which belonged to human, 24 to mouse and 6 to rat. 287 of these records contained sufficient
annotation for orientation determination. 132 were single-pass entries of which 120
records were from humans, 11 from mouse, and 1 from rat. 155 were multi-pass entries containing 898 transmembrane helices. 144 were records from human, 8 were
from mouse and 3 were from rat.
UniGolgi. The clustered human dataset was queried using UniProtKB for Golgi
subcellular location (locations:(location:”Golgi apparatus [SL-0132]” evidence:manual)).
This returned 323 protein entries, 301 of which belonged to human, 19 to mice, 2 to
rat and 1 to pig. 269 of these records contained sufficient annotation for orientation
determination. 206 were single-pass entries of which 195 records were from human, 9
from mouse, and 1 from rat. 61 were multi-pass entries containing 383 transmembrane
regions. 54 were records from human, 6 were from mouse and 1 was from rat.
UniPM. The clustered human dataset was queried using UniProtKB for the cell
membrane subcellular location (locations:(location:”Cell membrane [SL-0039]” evidence:manual)). This returned 1036 protein entries, 948 of which belonged to humans,
62 to mice, and 26 to rats. 920 of these records contained sufficient annotation for
orientation determination. 493 were single-pass entries of which 451 records were from
human, 37 from mouse, and 5 from rat. 427 were multi-pass entries containing 3079
transmembrane regions. 394 were records from human, 17 were from mouse and 16

56

CHAPTER 2. THE “NEGATIVE-OUTSIDE” RULE

were from rat.
UniCress. For the mouse ear cress, a representative proteome dataset was acquired
with the query annotation:proteomes:(reference:yes) AND reviewed:yes AND organism:”Arabidopsis thaliana (Mouse-ear cress) [3702]” AND proteome:up000006548. This
returned 3174 records in UniProtKB. UniRef90 identified 3111 clusters. 3110 of the
representative sequences were mapped back to UniProtKB. Of those, 3090 were from
Arabidopsis thaliana, 2 from Hornwort, 1 from cucumber, 1 from tall dodder, 1 from
soybean (Glycine max), 2 from Indian wild rice, 2 from rice, 2 from garden pea, 1
from potato, 4 from spinach, 1 from Thermosynechococcus elongatus (thermophilic
cyanobacteria), 1 from wheat, and 2 from maize. Of those there were 1146 with suitable TOPO DOM annotation for topological orientation determination. 632 of those
records were identified as single-pass, all of which were from Arabidopsis thaliana.
507 protein records were from multi-pass records, which contained 3823 transmembrane helices. 506 of those records were from Arabidopsis thaliana, whilst 1 was from
Thermosynechococcus elongatus.
UniFungi. For the Fungi dataset, the query annotation:(type:transmem) taxonomy:”Fungi [4751]” AND reviewed:yes was used. This returned 5628 records that were
submitted to Uniref90. Uniref90 identified 4934 representative records, all of which
were successfully mapped back to UniProtKB. Of those, 2070 had suitable annotation
for orientation. 1990 records belonged to Ascomycota including 1243 Saccharomycetales. 73 were Basidomycota, and 6 were Apansporoblastina. 729 records contained
a single TMH region, 702 of which belonged to Ascomycota, 26 to Basidomycota and
one to Encephalitozoon cuniculi, a Microsporidium parasite. 8698 helices were contained in 1338 records of multi-pass proteins. Of these records 1285 were Ascomycota,
47 were Basidomycota, and 5 were Apansporoblastina. One TMH from UniFungi was
discounted from P32897 due to an unknown position.
UniEcoli. This dataset was generated by querying UniProt with reviewed:yes AND
organism:Escherichia coli (strain K12)[83333] which returned 941 hits. The hits were
submitted to Uniref90, which returned 935 clusters. The representative IDs were then
resubmitted to UniProtKB, all of which returned successfully. 934 were from Bacteria, whilst one were from lambdalike viruses. Of the bacterial records, 862 were
from various Escherichia species of which 565 were from E. coli strain K12, 28 were

2.6. METHODS

57

from Salmonella choleraesuis, 25 were from Shigella and the rest all also fell under
Gammaproteobacteria class. This dataset contains 54 single-pass proteins and 3888
helices from 529 multi-pass proteins with sufficient annotation for topological determination.
UniBacilli. The Bacilli dataset was constructed by querying UniProt for reviewed:yes
AND taxonomy:Bacilli. This returned 5044 records, which were submitted to Uniref90.
2,591 clusters were found in Uniref from these records. The representative IDs were
successfully resubmitted to UniProtKB. 2031 of these were of the genus Bacillales
whilst 560 were also of the genus Lactobacillales. This dataset contains 124 singlepass proteins and 822 helices from 140 multi-pass proteins.
UnArch. The Archaea dataset was constructed by querying UniProt for reviewed:yes
AND taxonomy:Archaea [2157]. This returned 1,152 records, which were submitted
to Uniref90. 1,054 clusters were found in Uniref from these records. The representative IDs were successfully resubmitted to UniProtKB. 946 records belonged to the
Euyarchaeota, 101 to Thermoprotei, 4 to Thaumarchaeota, and 3 to Korarchaeum
cryptofilum. This dataset contains 48 single-pass proteins and 59 multi-pass proteins
containing 327 helices from 59 proteins.
To note, we are aware that proteome datasets are a moving target that have dramatically changed over the years and, probably, will continue to do so to some extent
in the future[83]. Yet, we think that currently available protein sequence sets are sufficiently good for the purpose as we search for statistical properties in the TMH context
only.

2.6.2

On the determination of flanking regions for TMHs and
the TMH alignment

The determination of the boundary point at the sequence between the TMH in a
membrane and the sequence immersed in the cytoplasm, extracellular space, vesicular
lumen, etc. is not that trivial as it initially appears. There is a lot of dynamics in the
TMH positioning and the actual boundary point will be represented by various residues
at different time points. Whilst the TMH core region detection from a sequence is
trivial with modern software, the exact determination of TMH boundaries remains

58

CHAPTER 2. THE “NEGATIVE-OUTSIDE” RULE

difficult since it is unclear exactly how far in or out of the membrane a given helix
extends[84]. Previous studies have dealt with this issue in various ways[9,13,16,85].
Here in this work, we explore two boundary definitions. First, we assign TMH
boundary locations as described in the respective databases. These flanks are the
ones that are reported in our TMH data files that are available at the WWW-site
associated with this paper. We studied flank lengths of 5, 10, and 20 residues preceding
and following the inside and outside TMH boundaries. In these cases, the flanks are
aligned relative to the residue closest to the TMH.
In cases where the loops before and after the TMH are shorter than the predefined
flank lengths, further precautions are necessary. In the multi-pass datasets particularly
(Figure S4, Table S1), the flanks overlap with other membrane region flanks. We
explore several variants. On the one hand, we work with data files where the flank
residue stretches are equally truncated so that no overlap occurs. If the loop length was
uneven, the central odd residue was not included into any flank. We find surprisingly,
that a large number of TMH has no or just a super-short flank, a circumstance that
should disturb any statistical analysis due to the absence of objects. Therefore, we
also work with alternative datasets (i) with flanks overlapping between consecutive
TMH (e.g., in Table 3B; yet, it leads to some residues being counted more than one
time) as well as (ii) with subsets of the data where the flanks at both sides have a
defined minimal length (50
The problem of flanks overlapping does affect also some single-pass and multipass TMH proteins with INTRAMEM regions as described in some UniProt entries.
We do not include INTRAMEM regions in the datasets as TMHs but, sometimes,
the flanking regions of TMHs were truncated to avoid overlap with INTRAMEM
flanking regions (Supplementary Table S2). The identifiers affected for single-pass
TMH proteins are Q01628, P13164, Q01629, Q5JRA8, A2ANU3 (UniHuman), P13164,
Q01629, A2ANU3 (UniPM) and Q5JRA8 (UniER).
The second form of boundary point definition for flank determination was achieved
with gaplessly aligning all TMHs relative to their central residue at the position equal
to half the length of the TMHs at either side. Though there is some length variation
among TMHs, most of them are centred around a length of 20-22 residues. In this case,
flanks are the sequence extensions beyond the standardised-length 21-residues TMHs.

2.6. METHODS

59

We define the inside flanking segments as the positions -20 to -10 and the outside
flanking regions to be +10 to +20 from the central TMH residue (with the label
0). Instead of emphasizing some artificially selected boundary residue, this definition
allows the average TMH boundary transition to become apparent.

2.6.3

Separating simple and complex single-pass helices.

Single-pass helices from ExpAll and UniHuman datasets helices were split into two
groups: simple and complex following a previously described classification[6,7] to
roughly distinguish simple hydrophobic anchors and TMHs with additional structural/functional roles. Simple and complex helices were determined using TMSOC[7].
The complexity class is determined by calculating the hydrophobicity and sequence
entropy. The resulting coordinates cluster with anchors being more hydrophobic and
less complex whilst more complex and more polar TMHs are associated with nonanchorage functions. In UniHuman there were 889 simple helices and 570 complex
TMHs. In ExpAll there were 769 simple helices and 570 complex helices.

2.6.4

Distribution normalisation

In this work, we have used normalisation techniques described in previous investigations as well as new approaches designed to more sensitively identify biases of rare
residues. Baeza-Delgado and co-workers used LogOdds normalisation column-wise in
TMH alignments. Critically, this is based on their definition of probability, which takes
into account the total number of amino acids in the dataset as a denominator[13]. Since
aliphatic residues such as leucine and other highly abundant slightly polar residues
dominate the denominator, the distribution of the rare acidic residues will be easily lost in the background noise of those highly abundant residues. Pogozheva and
co-workers used two approaches, (i) the total accessible surface area (ASAtotal) and
(ii) total number of charged residues (Ntotal) as a denominator in their distribution
normalisation[16].
In this work, two methods for measuring residue occurrence in the TMH and its
flanks were used. Similarly to previous work, we compute the occurrence of an amino
acid type at a certain sequence position in a set of aligned sequences TMHs and their

60

CHAPTER 2. THE “NEGATIVE-OUTSIDE” RULE

flanks. Following[9], the absolute relative occurrence of this amino acid type at the
sequence position is then given by equation (1) as . (1)

pi,r =

ai,r
max(ar )

(2.1)

r

Here, the denominator is the maximal number of all residues in any alignment column (i.e., the number of sequences in the alignment) and, to emphasise, this will make
mostly dependent on the most abundant residue types. This type of normalization
reveals the most preferred residue types at given sequence positions.

qi,r =

100 · ai,r
ai

(2.2)

Our second normalization method is independent of the abundance of any amino
acid types other than the studied one; it answers the question: If there is a residue
of type in the TMH-containing segment, where would it most likely be? This relative
occurrence calculated in equation (2) as . (2) The value is the total abundance of
residues of just amino acid type in a given alignment of TMH-containing segments
(i.e., in the TMH together with its two adjoining flanks summed over all cases of
TMHs in the given dataset). Peaks in as function of r reveal the prefered positions of
residues of type i. The difference in and normalisation is visualised in Figure S3.

2.6.5

Hydrophobicity calculations

Hydrophobicity profiles were calculated using the Kyte & Doolittle hydrophobicity
scale[52] and validated with the Eisenberg scale[54], the Hessa biological scale[36], and
the White and Wimley whole residuescale [53] (Figure S1). The hydrophobicity profile
uses un-weighted windowing of the residue hydrophobicity scores from end to end of
the TMD slice. Three residues were used as full window lengths and partial windows
were permitted.

2.6.6

Normalised net charge calculations

Charge was calculated at each position by scanning through each position of the transmembrane helices and flanking regions and subtracting one from the position if an
acidic residue (D or E) was present, or adding one if a positively charged residue (K or

2.6. METHODS

61

R) was present. The accumulative net-charge was then divided by the total number
of transmembrane helices that were used in calculating the accumulative net-charge.
Thus, the charge distribution is calculated by: (3)

cr =

2.6.7

(aK,r + aR,r ) − (aD,r + aE,r )
N

(2.3)

statistics

The inside/outside bias of negative residues was quantified by computing the independent Kruskal-Wallis and the 2-sample t-test statistical method from the Python scipy

stat package v0.15 python package (https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy/reference/generat

https://docs.scipy.org/doc/scipy-0.15.0/reference/generated/scipy.stats.ttest i
This test answers the question whether two means are actually different in the statistical sense. For the leucine residues, each TMH region was divided into two sections,
representing the inner and outer leaflets (Table 4). For the hydrophobicity plot, 3 window values of hydrophobicity were taken for each TMH at each position. The statistical analyses were separately performed for single-pass and multi-pass transmembrane
proteins. At each position, the two groups were compared using the Kruskal-Wallis
test.
The zero hypothesis of homogeneity of two distributions was examined with the
KS, the KW and the χ2 statistical tests. To note, the KS test scrutinises for significant
maximal absolute differences between distribution curves; the KW test is after skews
between distributions and the χ2 statistical test checks the average difference between
distributions. As the statistical significance value (Pvalue) is a strong function of N,
the total amount of data used in the statistical test, we rely on the (absolute) Bahadur
slope (B) as a measure of distance between two distributions[55-57]: (4) The larger
the absolute Bahadur slope, the greater the difference between the two distributions.

Chapter 3
Tail-Anchored Proteins Revisited;
An Up-To-Date Dataset And
Biochemical Insights Into
Spontaneous Insertion
3.1

Abstract

3.2

Introduction

This study aims to identify SNARE proteins in eukaryotic proteomes by filtering
through large datasets using automatically predicted TrEMBL consensus, and manually annotated SWISS-PROT transmembrane regions. The pipeline generates a list of
singlepass proteins with a transmembrane domain close to the C terminal, that are not
splice isoforms. A previous study predicted 411 tail anchor proteins [Kalbfleisch2007].

3.3

Methods

The original list UniProt protein database was queried for records containing “TRANSMEM” annotation on June 15, 2016, totaling 75826 records from swissprot, and
12322000 records from TrEMBL.
62

3.4. RESULTS

3.3.1

63

Filtering the Uniprot database

Steps carried out by Kalbfleisch et al. published in Traffic 2007 (8: 16871694) [Kalbfleisch2007
were recreated using up to date tools. The nonredundant human dataset of 145,715
proteins from SwissProt and TrEMBL [TheUniProtConsortium2014]. 2,478 singlepass proteins were programmatically extracted according to the TRANSMEM count
from that list. Then TMDs not within 15AA of the C terminal were removed, resulting
in 455 proteins. No splice isoforms were detected according to searching for NON TER
annotation. 195 proteins of the 411 predicted proteins from the previous study were
successfully mapped using the Uniprot mapping tools [TheUniProtConsortium2014].
Duplicate IDs from the previously predicted tail anchored protein were removed from
the set. The remaining dataset contained XXX proteins.

3.3.2

Calculating Hydrophobicity

3.3.3

Calculating Sequence Complexity

3.4

Results

3.4.1

An Up To Date Tail-Anchor Dataset

3.4.2

Potential Tail-Anchored SNARE Protein Discovery

3.4.3

Biology of Spontaneously Inserting Tail Anchored Proteins

Chapter 4
Protein Classification Based on
Intra-membrane Complexity
Arrangement
4.1

Abstract

4.2

Introduction

4.3

Methods

4.4

Results

64

Chapter 5
Conclusions
5.1
5.1.1

Outlook
The hydrophobicity–sequence complexity continuum

We hypothesize that the hydrophobicity–sequence complexity continuum contains nuanced codes for different functions and that such differentiation of sequence and structural properties will allow assignment to these varying functions. Additionally, we
suggest probing functional classification of yet uncharacterized membrane proteins by
similarities of combinations of complex TM sets to well studied membrane proteins and
finding those classes of TM proteins where this principle is most directly applicable.

65

